communications physics
A Nature Portfolio journal
Article

Neuroevolution of decentralized decision-
making in N-bead swimmers leads to
scalable and robust collective locomotion

Benedikt Hartl , Michael Levin  & Andreas Zöttl

Many microorganisms swim by performing larger non-reciprocal shape deformations that are initiated
locally by molecular motors. However, it remains unclear how decentralized shape control determines
the movement of the entire organism. Here, we investigate how efficient locomotion emerges from
coordinated yet simple and decentralized decision-making of the body parts using neuroevolution
techniques. Our approach allows us to investigate optimal locomotion policies for increasingly large
microswimmer bodies, with emerging long-wavelength body shape deformations corresponding to
surprisingly efficient swimming gaits. The obtained decentralized policies are robust and tolerant
concerning morphological changes or defects and can be applied to artificial microswimmers for
cargo transport or drug delivery applications without further optimization "out of the box". Our work is
of relevance to understanding and developing robust navigation strategies of biological and artificial
microswimmers and, in a broader context, for understanding emergent levels of individuality and the
role of collective intelligence in Artificial Life.

Microorganisms are ubiquitous in nature and play an essential role in many
biological phenomena, ranging from pathogenic bacteria affecting our
health to phytoplankton as a key player in the marine ecosystem on a global
scale. A large variety of microorganisms live in viscous environments, and
their motion is governed by the physics of low Reynolds number hydro-
dynamics, where viscous forces dominate over inertia. As a consequence,
a common strategy is to periodically deform their body shape in a non-
reciprocal fashion to swim. To thrive in the environment, they have
developed different tailored strategies to exploit their swimming capabilities,
such as actively navigating toward a nutrient-rich source, hunting down
prey, escaping predators, or reproducing. Besides being of direct biological
relevance, understanding the corresponding navigation strategies of
microorganisms bears potential for biomedical or technical applications,
potentially utilized by synthetic microswimmers deployed as targeted drug
delivery systems.

Nature has evolved many different strategies and control mechanisms
for microswimmers to swim fast, efficiently, and adaptive to environmental
conditions: For example, swimming algae cells or sperm cells move with the
help of waving cilia or flagella, respectively, or amoebae such as
Dictyostelium and unicellular protists such as Euglenia by deforming
their entire cell body. The associated deformation amplitudes and wave-
lengths can be on the order of the entire size of the organism.


In the last years, Reinforcement Learning (RL) has been applied to
understand navigation strategies of microswimmers, for example under
external fluid flow or external fields, or to perform chemotaxis in the
presence of chemical gradients. So far, most of these studies treat
microswimmers as rigid agents, i.e., explicitly omitting body deformations
or other internal degrees of freedom, and simply manipulate their ad hoc
swimming speed and rotation rates for control purposes to perform well in a
particular environment. Only very recent contributions consider the
constraints of physically force-free shape-deforming locomotion of plastic
model microswimmers in an effort to identify swimming gaits that explicitly
utilize the hydrodynamic interactions between different body parts in a
viscous environment. Modeling such a body-brain-environment offers
explicit and more realistic behavior of the response of an organism to
environmental conditions.

The locomotion of microswimmers and microrobots moving in viscous
fluids at low Reynolds numbers can be modeled with various numerical
methods of different accuracy. Examples for actively deforming slender fila-
ments as they occur in biological systems or in soft robotics are slender body
theory (e.g., ref. ), or Cosserat rod models (e.g., refs. ). Yet the simplest
models, which usually outperform the aforementioned methods in terms of
computation time, discretize a filament or a microswimmer by inter-
connected beads where hydrodynamic interactions are captured in the
far-field limit, such as in the Oseen or Faxén approximation. These models
are particularly useful for Evolutionary Algorithms (EAs) in RL, which rely on
the efficient simultaneous simulation of a whole population of
microswimmers .

A prominent and very simple and efficient model that has frequently
been investigated with RL techniques is the (generalized) Najafi-
Golestanian (NG) microswimmer, typically consisting of  (or
more) concentrically aligned beads immersed into a viscous environment.
Such a composite N-bead NG microswimmer can self-propel via non-
reciprocal periodic shape deformations that are induced by coordinated
time-dependent periodic forces applied to every bead, which sum up to zero
for force-free microswimmers. Conventional strategies to describe the
autonomous locomotion of a microswimmer consisting of hydro-
dynamically interacting beads utilize a centralized controller that integrates
all the information about the current state of the microswimmer in its
environment (comprising internal degrees of freedom and potential
environmental cues such as chemical field concentrations). As such, it
proposes control instructions for every actuator in the system, thereby
inducing dynamics, i.e., body deformations, that are most optimal for a
specific situation given a particular task. To substitute and mimic the
complex and adaptable decision-making machinery of biological micro-
swimmers, such controllers are often realized by trainable Artificial Neural
Networks (ANNs).

Centralized decision-making relies on the (sensory) input of all indi-
vidual body parts of a composite microswimmer, i.e., quantities such as the
relative positions, velocities, or other degrees of freedom for all  beads, and
the corresponding control actions target all system actuators, i.e., what
forces to apply to every one of the  beads. While the number of trainable
parameters of a controller ANN scales at least quadratically with the number
of beads , the number of possible perceivable states and controlling actions
scales in a combinatorial way with the number of degrees of freedom of the
sensory input and the action output. This not only immensely complicates
deep-learning procedures but essentially renders exhaustive approaches
infeasible given the vast combinatorial space of possible input-output
mappings for large . Thus, while generalized NG swimmers with ≥3
have been successfully trained to perform locomotion or chemotaxis
tasks , they have been limited to a relatively small number of body parts,
i.e., a small number of degrees of freedom, ≤10, so far.

However, even unicellular organisms are fundamentally made of
(many) different parts, which (co-)operate in a seamlessly coordinated way:
in biological microswimmers, for example, collective large body deforma-
tions are typically achieved through orchestrated and cooperative action of
molecular motors and other involved proteins, inducing, e.g., the local
deformation of the cilia-forming axoneme via localized contractions and
extensions . Consequently, such organisms—without an apparent cen-
tralized controller-cooperatively utilize their body components in a fully
self-orchestrated way in order to swim by collectively deforming and
reconfiguring their body shape. For example, the periodically deforming
shapes of eukaryotic flagella are not designed or pre-defined by cellular
signals, but are an emerging property of the specific local forces applied by
the molecular motors on the filament . Moreover, such decentralized
navigation policies tend to be robust and failure-tolerant with respect to
changing morphological or environmental conditions, e.g., if parts of the
locomotive components are disabled or missing, or unforeseeable situations
are encountered. Strong signs of such generalizing problem-solving skills are
observed, for example, in cells, slime molds, and swarms, and, as
recently suggested, this fundamental ability of biological systems to self-
organize via collective decision-making might be the unifying organiza-
tional principle for integrating biology across scales and substrates. Thus, the
plastic and functional robustness and the innate drive for adaptability found
in biological systems might not only further robotics  but facilitate
unconventional forms of computation based on collective intelligence .

So far, it remains unclear how decentralized decision-making in a
deformable microswimmer can lead to efficient collective locomotion of its
body parts. We thus investigate biologically motivated decentralized yet
collective decision-making strategies of the swimming behavior of a gen-
eralized NG swimmer, serving as a simple model system for, e.g., a uni-
cellular organism, or a controllable swimming microrobot. Optimizing
collective tasks in systems of artificial agents, such as collectively moving
composite (micro)-robots, can be addressed with Multi-Agent Reinfor-
cement Learning (MARL). Typically employed concepts such as Cen-
tralized Training with Decentralized Execution (CTDE) often rely on the
usage of overparameterized deep neural networks and complex information
sharing across agents during training . In contrast to conventional
MARL we employ here a recently developed method which utilizes EAs
to optimize lean decentralized control policies based on collective perfor-
mance quantified by a global fitness signal (i.e., without the need for local
credit assignment). Such collective agents have a topology reminiscent of
Neural Cellular Automata  (NCAs), where all distributed agents share the
same ANN architecture while exchanging low-bandwidth information
between neighbors on the grid of a cellular automaton to update their states
and hence the collective behavior in the problem domain; here, the beads of
a generalized NG swimmer will be treated as the cells of an NCA which will
learn to coordinate locally to exert non-reciprocal bead-specific forces to
propagate the collective microswimmer body. Furthermore, in our
approach, we are able to overcome earlier limitations by extending our
swimmers to much larger  than previously feasible, allowing us to identify
locomotion strategies in the limit →∞. To this end, we interpret each bead
of the microswimmer's body as an agent that can only perceive information
about its adjacent beads and whose actions induce contractions or exten-
sions of its adjacent muscles. We substitute the internal decision-making
machinery of such single-bead agents with ANNs and employ genetic
algorithms and neuroevolution to machine learn optimal policies for such
single-bead decision-making centers, such that the entire N-bead swimmer
can efficiently self-propel collectively, i.e., in a decentralized way. We show
that the evolved policies are robust and failure-tolerant concerning mor-
phological changes of the collective microswimmer and that such decen-
tralized control—trained for microswimmers with a specific number of
beads-generalizes well to vastly different morphologies.

Results and discussion
The N-bead swimmer model
Here, we investigate swimming strategies optimized by RL and the corre-
sponding physical implications of N-bead generalized NG swimmer
models moving in a fluid of viscosity μ. A swimmer consists of  co-
centrically aligned spheres of radius  located at positions ,  = 1..., ,
at time . These beads are connected pairwise by massless arms of length
, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. The swimmer deforms and
moves by applying time-dependent forces  on the
beads. The active forces  are proposed by RL agents (see below), and
passive restoring forces are applied when arm lengths  becomes
smaller than 0.7, or lager than 1.3, where we choose  as
the reference arm length. The swimmer is force-free, ∑ = 0,
and the bead velocities  are obtained in the Oseen approximation,
, (see the “Hydrodynamic interactions
and numerical details for the N-bead swimmer model" subsection in the
"Methods").

Modeling system-level decision-making with decentralized
controllers
To identify the active forces , we assign an ensemble of
independent yet identical controllers to every bead which respectively can
only perceive local information about adjacent beads (such as distances and
velocities of their neighbors) and propose actions to update their respective
states (such as proposing bead-specific forces to update their own posi-
tions). Yet, these bead-specific agents follow a shared objective to collec-
tively self-propel the entire N-bead swimmer's body. More specifically-as
illustrated in Fig. 1 and detailed in the "Artificial neural network-based
decentralized controllers" subsection in the "Methods"-for each time  the
controller associated with the bead  perceives its left- and right-neighbor
distances, , and its own- and the neighboring
beads' velocities . Moreover, each bead
maintains an internal vector-valued state, . This state can be utilized by
the respective controller to store, update, and actively share recurrent
information with other beads that is not necessarily bound to the physical
state of the swimmer but an emergent property of the collective RL system:
Every controller thus perceives its neighboring states,
, which additionally guide the agent's
decision-making (see "Methods” and ref.  for details). In total, the per-
ception of a single bead agent is given by  and does not contain any agent-specific or global reward signals.

After integrating information about its local environment, , the
controller of each bead  computes, and then outputs an action,
, comprising a proposed active force, , and an
internal state update,  (see Fig. 1b); this extends the
purely state -dependent inverse pattern formation task discussed in ref. 
with local perception-action loops in a hydrodynamic environment. The
proposed forces are limited to  by clamping the controllers'
force outputs to ±, where  sets the force scale in our system and hence
the maximum power consumption and bead velocities of the swimmer.

To model a force-free swimmer, we propose two different methods of
how the mapping between the proposed forces , and the actual active
forces , is achieved: First, we interpret the proposed forces as pairwise
arm forces  and  applied between two consecutive beads  and
, respectively (see Fig. 2a). This leads to the actual active forces 
for beads , where we treat the swimmer's "head"
and "tail" separately by setting  and introducing . This
automatically ensures ∑ = 0. In this sense, the proposed actions
can be understood as local decisions to expand/contract muscles between
the beads where the maximum local power input on a bead is constrained
and set by the value of . Second, we assume that the proposed force  of
every controller directly targets the actual force applied to its associated
bead, but, to fulfill the force-free condition, we subtract the mean 
from every proposed force and arrive at 
(see Fig. 2b). Hence the first approach ensures the global force-free
condition via a series of locally annihilating pair-forces motivated by bio-
logical force dipole generation at small scales that cause the arms between
the corresponding beads  and () to contract or extend. In turn, the
second approach regularizes the forces by collective feedback (via ) and
can be interpreted as a mean-field approach that may be utilized by external
controllers for artificial microswimmers. Henceforth, we refer to the first
scenario as type A, and to the second scenario as type B microswimmers,
and alike for the corresponding self-navigation strategies or policies. We
note that for both type A and B microswimmers the total force per bead is
constrained to , except for the first and last bead of type
A which are only connected to a single muscle such that for type A swim-
mers  and .

Following RL terminology, we refer to the mapping between perceptions
and actions of an agent (or here, synonymously, a controller) as its policy,
. In general, such a policy is a complicated and complex
function of the input, and ANNs as universal function approximators are
well-suited tools to parameterize these objects for arbitrary agents and
environments (see Methods). Thus, we approximate the RL agent's policy 
by an ANN, formally expressed as a function  with parameters , such
that . More specifically, we treat a single N-bead swimmer as a
multi-agent system, each bead being equipped with a functionally identical
but operationally independent ANN-based controller, . This renders the
system reminiscent of a Neural Cellular Automaton (NCA) with the
extension that the decentralized actions of all individual controllers give rise
to a collective locomotion policy ,
of the entire virtual organism (see also ref. ). Here, only a single set of
parameters  is used for all  bead-specific agents, i.e., the same ANN
controller is deployed to every bead; the states of the latter only differ in their
initial conditions and subsequent input-output-history. For our purposes, this
renders the optimization problem much more tractable compared to
situations with a single centralized controller, ,
especially for large swimmer morphologies.

Here, we aim at identifying optimal and robust swimming gaits for
arbitrarily large N-bead swimmers, which translates to finding suitable
ANN parameters, , such that the bead-specific perception-action cycles,
, collectively self-propel the multi-agent system effi-
ciently in a certain direction. More specifically, the set of parameters 
comprises the weights and biases of the agent's ANN-based controller,
which we designed to be numerically feasible for our neuroevolution
approach (see below): In stark contrast to traditional RL agents, with often
more than tens or hundreds of thousands of parameters, we here utilize a
predefined architecture inspired by refs.  with only 59 parameters (see
the "Artificial neural network-based decentralized controllers" subsection in
the "Methods"). Thus, we can utilize EAs, specifically a simple genetic
algorithm discussed in the “Genetic algorithm and neuroevolution of
single-agent policies with collective goals" subsection in the “Methods," to
adapt the ANN parameters (but not the ANN topology) such that the
entire N-bead swimmer's mean center of mass (COM) velocity,

, is maximized for a predefined swimming
duration , where  is the time interval between
two consecutive perception-action cycles of an RL agent.  is chosen suf-
ficiently large to provide the respective N-bead swimmer enough time to
approach a steady swimming state and to execute several swimming strokes,
starting from randomized initial positions. Thus, we define the objective, i.e.,
the fitness score in terms of EAs, or the reward in terms of RL, as the mean
COM velocity , averaged over  statistically independent
episodes, and search for  through variation  of the
parameters  via EAs, as detailed in the "Genetic algorithm and neuroe-
volution of single-agent policies with collective goals" subsection in the
"Methods".

Individual, bead-specific decisions facilitate collective swim-
ming of an N-bead swimmer
We utilize EAs to optimize the parameters of the ANN-based controllers
(which are deployed to every bead in a specific morphology) for
different realizations of our multi-agent microswimmer models. More
specifically, we deploy morphologies ranging from  to  beads of
type A and B microswimmers and train every swimmer of different size 
for both types independently via EAs to self-propel by maximizing their
respective fitness score . For details on the utilized ANNs and the applied
EA we refer to the "Modeling system-level decision-making with decen-
tralized controllers" subsection in the “Results and Discussion” and to the
"Methods".

The training progress is presented in Fig. 1 exemplarily for type A
microswimmers of different morphologies , demonstrating that the pro-
posed decentralized decision-making strategy is capable of facilitating fast
system-level swimming gaits for all the considered swimmer sizes up to
. Thus, our method removes the bottleneck for machine-learning
navigation policies of large-scale microswimmers by employing computa-
tionally manageable local ANN-based perception-action loops of their
bead-specific agents. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time
successful training of microswimmers with such a large number of degrees
of freedom has been achieved.

Different strategies of autonomy: large-scale coordination
enables fast swimming
Employing the learned policies of both type A and B microswimmers for
different body sizes, i.e., the number of beads , we determine the respective
stroke-averaged COM velocities , which increase monotonously with  as
depicted in Fig. 3a, b. We normalize all velocities here with ,
i.e., the velocity of a bead dragged by an external force of strength . Type B
swimmers are significantly faster compared to type A swimmers by almost
one order of magnitude, especially for large . As illustrated in Fig. 3a, for
type A microswimmers with locally ensured force-free conditions, the mean
COM velocity  saturates with increasing  at  for .
In contrast (c.f., Fig. 3b), the fastest type B microswimmer, again at ,
achieves a maximum COM velocity of .

The insets in Fig. 3a, b illustrate results for the well-studied three-bead
swimmer (). First, they show the characteristic periodic 1-step-back-2-
step-forward motion of the COM trajectory. Second, the corresponding
steady state phase space dynamics of the active forces on beads 1 and 3,
(), and of the arm lengths (), reiterating the periodic motion. Note
that the force on bead 2 simply follows from . While both
type A and B three-bead swimmers move at comparable speed, this is
achieved with different policies, as can be seen by the different phase space
curves (see also Supplementary Movie 1).

In Fig. 3c, d, we present trajectories of both the COM and bead-specific
coordinates (top panels; respective insets emphasize the COM dynamics),
and of the bead-specific proposed forces (bottom panels) for an ()-
bead type A- and ()-bead type B microswimmer, respectively. These
selected trajectories demonstrate the genuinely different swimming strate-
gies for type A and B microswimmers (which have been optimized with the
same EA settings).

In type A microswimmers (Fig. 3c), the pairwise arm forces induce
periodic waves of arm contractions of relatively high frequency but small
wavelength, which travel through and move forward the body of the N-bead
microswimmer. For swimmers with a sufficiently large number of beads  this
leads to a relatively smooth and linear COM motion (see inset in Fig. 3c).

In stark contrast, the fastest swimming strategies for type B micro-
swimmers (Fig. 3d) assumes coordinated arm strokes across large fractions
of their bodies, essentially contracting and extending almost the entire
swimmer simultaneously, which is reflected in the oscillatory COM motion
even for very large  (see inset in Fig. 3d). This large-scale coordination
exceeds the capabilities of the locally interlocked policies of type A micro-
swimmers and strikes us as an emergent phenomenon which-still based
on purely local decision-making-is facilitated by the mean-field motivated
feedback of the mean proposed force of all the agents in the system: type B
microswimmers seemingly act as a single entity, despite the fact that the
precise number of constituents, , is not important and can vary (see also
Supplementary Movies 2 and 3).


As shown in Fig. 3d, typical emergent swimming gaits of the respective
type B swimmers are reminiscent of the large amplitude contraction-wave
based locomotion of crawling animals such as caterpillars. Similarly, the
crawling locomotion of crawling fly larvae had been optimized using RL
recently. In the context of locomotion in viscous fluids, large-amplitude
traveling waves along the body have been discussed as an alternative
swimming strategy of flagella-less organisms.

Transferable evolved policies: decentralized decision-making
generalizes to arbitrary morphologies
We have recently shown that biologically inspired NCA-based multi-
agent policies especially when evolved via evolutionary processes-can
display behavior that is highly robust against structural and functional
perturbations and exhibit increased generalizability, adaptability, and
transferability. We thus investigate here whether our decentralized
locomotion policies, which are genuinely evolved for microswimmer
bodies with exactly  beads, generalize to morphological changes. More
specifically, we carefully optimize ANN policies for a particular number
of  to 100 beads (as discussed above) and deploy them-without
any retraining or further adaptation-into microswimmer bodies with a
different number of  to 300 beads instead to evaluate the corre-
sponding swimming velocities for such cross-policy environments.

As illustrated in Fig. 4a, b, we find that the vast majority of all
policies that are most optimal for a particular value of  are also highly
effective in self-propelling microswimmers with  for both type A
and B, respectively. This even holds for situations where , such as
 and . We did not explicitly optimize for this property at
all, but it is an emergent phenomenon of the inherent decentralized
decision-making of the system. Thus, the collective nature of the pro-
posed swimming policies renders the evolved locomotive strategies
highly adaptive to morphological changes, irrespective of the specific
number of beads  used during deployment. Only for a few situations
which can occur when the number of beads  deviates significantly from
the number of beads  used during training, do not lead to successful
swimming, in particular for type B microswimmers (Fig. 4b). In those
cases the locally emerging periodic arm motion is lost and the beads are
trapped in a resting state.

Moreover, the set of policies evolved and deployed for
different bead numbers of  and , respectively, allows us to estimate a
trend for optimal swimming gaits for large : In steady state, the arm-
lengths  of an arbitrary trained -bead swimmer describe limit
cycle dynamics in an (-1)-dimensional phase space (c.f., Fig. 3).
Then, all arms oscillate at the same angular velocity  and exhibit the
same cross-correlation times  to their neighboring arms, where
, and we can express each of the , ..., arm
lengths as a 2-periodic function , with the
phase shift  defining the initial conditions; for more details about  and
we refer to the "Swimming-gait analysis" subsection in the "Methods”.
We can also write  in the form of a wave equation as
, where the bead index  controls the “spatial”
oscillations at a (dimensionless) wavelength  irrespective of the
corresponding physical bead positions . A careful analysis of
different naive block-swimmer or waveform policies in the Supple-
mentary Note 1 suggests that the found waveform parametrization
obtained by the RL procedure is close to the optimum within our model
assumptions for sufficiently large microswimmers. In particular, we
find that the best policies for the proposed forces for the faster,
sufficiently large type B microswimmers are well approximated by
; the swimming speed is close to max-
imum by choosing for  and  the respective values obtained from our
RL procedure.

In Fig. 4c, e, g, we respectively present , , and  for the fastest type A
microswimmers as a function of  (blue circles), additionally to the training
conditions where  (magenta "x" symbol). We can see that these
quantities are almost independent of , and we observe only weak
logarithmic dependencies of  and  (see Fig. 4 caption). In contrast, for type
B see Fig. 4d, f, h, the angular velocity is approximately inverse to the
swimmer length , and the wavelength almost linear to , 
(detailed fits see Fig. 4 caption). As a result, the evaluated  values for
type B microswimmers (Fig. 4f) are almost constant and the values are
comparable to those of the type A microswimmer, but slightly decrease
with .

Large-scale coordination leads to efficient locomotion
In our approach, we limit the maximum forces on each of the beads and,
thus, the maximum bead velocities. This procedure is somewhat similar
as fixing the total power consumption of the swimmer. In previous
optimization procedures on 3- and N-bead swimmers commonly the
swimming efficiency is optimized, where e.g., the power consump-
tion of the entire swimmer is taken into account as a single, global
quantity. In contrast, in our work, we set local constraints on the
swimmer by limiting the forces on every bead. Although we hence did
not optimize in our RL procedure for the hydrodynamic efficiency  of
our swimmers, we measure  determined by refs. ,  
where  is the stroke-averaged power consump-
tion, and  is the effective radius of our swimmers. There is no unique
way to define  of our swimmer (see also the discussion in ref. ), and
it is hence not straightforward to compare  of swimmers of different
size . We choose here , which approximates the combined
drag on all of the spheres, neglecting hydrodynamic interactions. The
power consumption is naturally limited to be  with
, for both cases, type A and B;  and 
are the force- and velocity-scale in our model, see the "Modeling
system-level decision-making with decentralized controllers” subsection
in the "Results and Discussion". However, type B swimmers can exploit
their higher freedom to adjust the forces on the beads compared to the
arm-force-limited type A swimmer to locomote at higher speed, and
hence at higher efficiency . As seen in Fig. 5a, b for both type A and B
swimmers, the efficiency increases with swimmer length  and levels off
at large . The efficiency is relatively low for all swimmer lengths  for
type A swimmers, and is limited to 0.12%. In contrast, long type B
swimmers can reach surprisingly high efficiencies of even ≈ 1.5% for
, comparable to the efficiency of real existing microswimmers.

As discussed above, a larger microswimmer can swim faster due to the
emergence of long-wavelength longitudinal waves. Indeed, it thus is not
surprising that longer type B swimmers are faster than shorter ones. Ani-
mals typically scale their speed with their size. Here we determine the
swimmer speed per size  depending on  as shown in Fig. 5c, d, where
we identify a maximum for  for type A and at  for type B. Hence,
these swimmers need the smallest amount of time to swim their own body
size  compared to swimmers of different . For large ,  decays with
a power law (see inset Fig. 5c, d).

Robust- and failure tolerant locomotion and cargo transport
without re-training
Since our evolved microswimmer policies show strong resilience even
against significant morphological perturbations (see Fig. 4), we aim to
investigate this operational plasticity even further: Exemplarily for the most
optimal type A and B microswimmers with (), we systematically load
the arms with extra passive "cargo" beads of variable radius , and
evaluate the dynamics of the corresponding loaded microswimmer con-
sisting now of  beads, without retraining or further optimization.
These cargo beads can geometrically be located between two neigh-
boring beads of the microswimmer, but remain functionally disjoint from
the latter (cargo beads are not connected by arms to any body beads): when
placed at an arm , a cargo bead does not disrupt the exchange of infor-
mation between the corresponding beads  and () and thus does not
affect the inputs of the respective bead-specific ANNs. Since cargo beads are
passive elements, they do not propose active forces independently,
, and are moved around solely by the hydrodynamic interaction
with the other beads and the restoring spring forces of nearby beads. This
ensures that a cargo bead is topologically fixed in the microswimmer's body.

Figures 6a, b demonstrates, that our approach of utilizing decen-
tralized, bead-specific controllers for N-bead microswimmer locomotion
not only gives rise to highly robust self-propulsion policies (see the
"Transferable evolved policies: decentralized decision-making generalizes to
arbitrary morphologies” subsection in the “Results and Discussion”) but can
also be used “out of the box” for cargo transport applications: We show
that both type A and B microswimmers are capable of swimming while
having additional cargo beads of various sizes located at different internal
positions, i.e., at different arms along their main axes. While the presence of
cargo beads significantly restrains the neighboring beads from adapting the
adjacent arm length, essentially locking the corresponding arm, the
remaining functional beads self-propel the entire microswimmer effectively.
We further emphasize that, in general, the swimming speed decreases with
increasing cargo size, .

Next, we successively fill all arms of a single microswimmer from the
left, , to the right, , simultaneously with a total number of
 cargo beads of equal radius  (one cargo per arm) and
measure the speed of the correspondingly loaded -bead micro-
swimmers as a function of the number of loaded arms and cargo size. Both
type A and B microswimmers are capable of transporting multiple cargo
loads at once efficiently, as illustrated in Fig. 6c, d: they can carry up to
≈50-60% of their active beads  before the respective locomotion cap-
abilities fail due to an increasing number of blocked arms. While we here
fixed  to demonstrate cargo transport, it can be applied to different
swimmer realizations, i.e., other morphologies and evolved policies: As
shown in the Supplementary Note 2a, microswimmers of different size 
display similarly behavior as shown in Fig. 6 for , rendering our
system highly robust against such morphological defects.

Another potential morphological malfunction in our model is cor-
rupting the information flow between selected neighboring beads. We thus
choose a number of  links  between different neighboring beads , 
(c.f., Fig. 1), and intentionally set the corresponding contributions
from bead , 's to bead , 's perception vectors  and  to zero before
measuring the corresponding swimming velocities of different swimmer
realizations; this will affect bead 's measurements of the distance →0,
velocity →0, and state →0 of the neighboring bead , and vice-
versa (see the "Modeling system-level decision-making with decentralized
controllers" subsection in the "Results and Discussion" and the "Methods").
As depicted in Fig. 7, the relative affected swimming velocity for type A
and B microswimmers of size  effectively decreases linearly as a function of
the fraction of blocked links . In fact, the microswimmers can
handle even a fraction of ≈50% blocked links while maintaining ≥50% of
their unaffected swimming speed.

Thus, our evolved navigation policies of the proposed micro-
swimmer system not only show strong resilience against partly sig-
nificant morphological changes of the swimmer's body (see also Fig. 4),
but even against functional alterations and failures of single or multiple
actuators (c.f., blocked arms and links in Figs. 6 and 7). Moreover, the
decentralized control paradigm in our microswimmer system is tolerant
against various sources of noise, e.g., in the predicted action outputs, in
the beads' input perceptions, and in the presence of thermal noise added
to the equations of motion, as detailed in the Supplementary Note 2b-d,
respectively. In the former two cases, efficient locomotion is still possible
for noise-to-signal ratios of 50% or even more. In the latter case, we add
additive noise with diffusivity , which allows for locomotion until

~0.1 with , i.e., down to Péclet num-
bers  of ~, therefore in the range of real microswimmer
systems. We emphasize that this goes well beyond what the swimmers
experienced during training and is a clear sign of generalizability and
robustness via collective decision-making.

Conclusions
Our study demonstrates that machine learning of decentralized decision-
making strategies of the distributed actuators in a composite in silico
microswimmer can lead to highly efficient navigation policies of the entire
organism that are, moreover, highly robust with respect to morphological
changes or defects. More specifically, we treat each of the  beads of a
generalized NG microswimmer model as an ANN-based agent that per-
ceives information about its adjacent beads and whose actions induce
activations of adjacent muscles. Via genetic algorithms, we have optimized
such single-bead decision-making centers to collectively facilitate highly
efficient swimming gaits on the system level of the NG swimmer.

In that way, we have identified locomotion strategies for increasingly
large microswimmer bodies, ranging from  to , with hydro-
dynamic efficiencies of up to η ≈ 1.5%, close to that of real biological
microswimmers; to the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration
of successfully training an ()-bead microswimmer.

While having focused here on evolving swimming gaits for NG
microswimmers of fixed morphologies, we report that the optimized
decentralized locomotion policies generalize well without any further
optimization towards partly severe morphological changes: policies
optimized for an -bead microswimmer are in most cases also highly
effective for ()-bead morphologies, even if  or vice versa. This
renders our approach robust and modular from both a physiological and
information processing point of view , going well beyond more tradi-
tional, in this sense much more brittle RL applications that are typically
concerned with centralized controllers with a fixed number of inputs and
outputs.

The limiting computational factor in our simulations is not the con-
troller part, but the  complexity of the hydrodynamic model, which
could be leveraged by further modeling, numerical optimization, or hard-
ware accelerators. However, the scalability of our approach allows us to
generalize the optimized policies as a function of , again overcoming
limitations posed by traditional RL methods, and leveraging analytical
investigations of the generalized NG model to the limit of →∞.

As we demonstrate, the inherent robustness and increased structural
and functional plasticity of the here investigated micros