The Bioelectrics of Immortality and Mortality in Cold-Sensitive
Hydra oligactis

Abstract
Introduction: Bioelectric properties of cells are an important aspect of development, regeneration, and cancer. Because of their relevance to the establishment and maintenance of tissue form and function, bioelectric patterns have been hypothesized to have a role in aging. However, no data on bioelectric patterns of the whole body of young and old individuals have been available.
Methods: We observed and quantified the bioelectrics of whole-body immortal (growing at 22°C) and aging mortal (growing at 10°C) cold-sensitive Hydra oligactis.
Results: We found that the membrane-voltage-sensitive dyes FluoVolt and VF2.1.Cl can be used to reveal large-scale patterns of cellular membrane resting voltage potentials in hydra. The consensus whole-body bioelectric atlas of immortal hydra shows a consistently depolarized foot and occasionally depolarized tentacles. Immortal hydra are, on average, more depolarized and exhibit less sharply defined bioelectric patterns than old mortal hydra. Immortal hydra have a sharper foot:central body ratio than old mortal hydra.
Conclusions: These data establish hydra as the first model system in which whole-body bioelectric imaging can be performed; the different bioelectric patterns of immortal versus old mortal hydra are consistent with a bioelectric component to the aging process and suggest a roadmap for using this model organism in antiaging therapeutic screens involving electroceuticals.

[PAGE 1] Introduction
Aging presents as a severe, progressive reduction in functional capacity and quality of life with a 100% penetrance.1,2 It also presents fascinating fundamental questions in evolutionary, cell, and developmental biology with respect to the algorithms implemented by living tissues to maintain form and function against disorder.3–12 Numerous theories of the underlying molecular causes of aging have been proposed.13-21 One set of approaches focuses on the progressive degradation of developmental information-cues that allow tissues to maintain a complex morphology for decades while materials and individual cells move in and out of the body. Since one key aspect of this information structure is maintained in bioelectrical gradients of resting potential across tissues, it has been suggested that degradation22-24 of specifically bioelectric information could be a cause of aging.25,26

[PAGE 2] Methods
Hydra husbandry and shrimp maintenance
We obtained CS H. oligactis from Brigitte Galliot's Lab.  We grew the hydra in media consisting of 0.294 g calcium chloride, 0.07 g magnesium sulfate, 0.08 g sodium bicarbonate (NaHCO3), and 0.004 g potassium chloride per 2 L of deionized (DI) water. We stored the hydra in 150 × 15 mm plastic Petri dishes (maximum 50 hydra per dish) in a light:dark 16:8 h cycle incubator at 22°C. We transferred the hydra to a new Petri dish with fresh liquid approximately every 2 weeks. We grew artemia shrimps in a plastic cone oxygenated with an air pump in a light:dark 16:8 h cycle incubator at 22°C. The plastic cone had ~300 mL of artemia brine shrimp media (25 g sodium chloride and 0.5 g NaHCO3 per 1 L of DI) and 0.5 g of artemia brine shrimp egg microcysts. We repeated the artemia brine shrimp growing process from artemia brine shrimp egg microcysts on Tuesdays and Fridays. We fed the hydra approximately one to four artemia brine shrimps per hydra on Mondays, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Fridays.

[PAGE 2] Testing for potential dye toxicity
We tested whether the FluoVolt dye is toxic to the hydra by observing their survival and phenotype after dyeing. Specifically, we collected the hydra from the 22°C incubator. We used five hydra per condition. We imaged the hydra under the Nikon SMZ1500 stereoscope. Then, for the treatment condition, we used the following volumes per hydra: FluoVolt (0.5 µL), power load (12.5 µL), Neuro Background Suppressor 10x (12.5 µL), and hydra media (224.5 µL). For the control, we used the following volumes per hydra: power load (12.5 µL), Neuro Background Suppressor 10× (12.5 μL), and hydra media (225 µL). We placed a hydra in 250 µL of the (control or treatment) solution in a well of a 24-well plate. After 5 min, we washed the well approximately five times with hydra media using a different plastic pipette each time.  We imaged the hydra again under the Nikon SMZ1500 stereoscope and then once every day for up to 4 days. During these 4 days, when the hydra were not imaged under the Nikon SMZ1500 stereoscope, they were kept in the 22°C incubator.

[PAGE 2] Aging induction
In the beginning of the experiment, after a month since the beginning, after 2 months since the beginning, and after 3 months since the beginning, we imaged four hydra from a culture growing at 22°C and four hydra from a culture growing at 10°C. After 4 months since the beginning of the experiment, we imaged eight hydra from the culture growing at 22°C and eight hydra from the culture growing at 10°C.

[PAGE 2] Dyeing and imaging the hydra
We performed the following steps in order to dye and image the hydra. We used fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy (FLIM) as it allows imaging of the relative membrane voltage in live organisms73 and does not rely on dye concentration versus other imaging techniques that rely on image intensity.68 On the confocal microscope, we set the chamber temperature at 18°C and 40% air flow. We used the 25x objective (HC Fluotar L Visir 25×/0.95 water) with drops of ultrapure water on the objective.  In the Leica Application Suite X (LASX) software, we used the following settings: 1024 x 1024 dimensions; bidirectional mode turned on; line accumulation: 9; speed: 700 Hz; numerical aperture: 0.95; WLL ON at 85% and maximum power; PinholeAiry: 1 AU; laser line (510 nm) and intensity 1.5%; spectral position: 528-617 nm; and gain = 10.

[PAGE 3] Image analysis of the aging experiment
We obtained the mean lifetime intensity and brightness whole-body images of each FluoVolt-dyed hydra from the LASX software. We transferred these two images of each hydra on ImageJ. We also transferred and ran the following file (Supplementary Data S1) on ImageJ. Downloading this file (Supplementary Data S2) is also required.  We then transferred and ran this file (Supplementary Data S3) on ImageJ.  In the case of the last file, we manually drew a line surrounding the hydra with the polygon tool.

[PAGE 3] Consensus bioelectric map of the hydra
To make a bioelectric atlas/map of every hydra, we analyzed separately the mean lifetime intensity whole-body data of the immortal hydra versus the mean lifetime intensity whole-body data of the old mortal hydra. We plotted the mean values of mean lifetime intensity of each hydra that was growing for 2 months (four hydra), 3 months (four hydra), and 4 months (eight hydra) at 22°C against the percentage of its body length on the x-axis and the mean values of mean lifetime intensity of each hydra that was growing for 2 months (four hydra), 3 months (four hydra), and 4 months (eight hydra) at 10°C against the percentage of its body length on the x-axis.

[PAGE 3] Image analysis of the VF2.0.Cl-dyed versus VF2.1.Cl-dyed versus FluoVolt-dyed hydra
We dyed 3 three-and-a-half-month-old hydra for 5 min with 250 µL of the following solution (1.5 µL of the VF2.1.Cl dye from a 1 mM stock solution,75 37.5 µL of power load, 37.5 µL of Neuro Background Suppressor 10×, and 673.5 µL of hydra media). We dyed 3 three-and-a-half-month-old hydra for 5 min with 250 µL of the following solution (1.5 µL of the VF2.0.Cl dye from a 1 mM stock solution,75 37.5 µL of power load, 37.5 µL of Neuro Background Suppressor 10x, and 673.5 µL of hydra media).  We dyed 3 three-and-a-half-month-old hydra for 5 min with 250 µL of the following solution (1.5 µL of the FluoVolt dye, 37.5 µL of power load, 37.5 µL of Neuro Background Suppressor 10x, and 673.5 µL of hydra media).

[PAGE 4] Statistical analyses
We performed all statistical analyses in R version 4.4.0.76 When the data followed an approximately normal distribution (p value >0.05 in Shapiro's test77) and we were comparing three or more different groups, we used an analysis of variance test. If the data did not follow a normal distribution (p value <0.05 in Shapiro's test77) and we were comparing three or more different groups, we performed the Kruskal-Wallis test. When the data did not follow a normal distribution (p value >0.05 in Shapiro's test”) and we were comparing two different groups, we performed the Wilcoxon rank-sum exact test.77

[PAGE 4] Results
Hydra survive the dyeing protocol with no consistent deformities
In order to test whether the FluoVolt dye that we used is toxic to the hydra, we compared the survival and phenotypes of hydra exposed to FluoVolt + power load + Neuro Background Suppressor 10× + hydra media versus power load + Neuro Background Suppressor 10× + hydra media.

[PAGE 4] V_mem-sensitive dye reveals relative membrane voltage of every cell along the hydra's body
In order to determine whether we can use immortal and mortal hydra as a model system to see the relative membrane voltage of every cell, we ran an imaging protocol with the V_mem-sensitive dye FluoVolt.

[PAGE 4] V_mem-sensitive dyes FluoVolt and VF2.1.Cl show relative membrane voltage and not artifacts
In order to test whether the V_mem-sensitive dyes FluoVolt and VF2.1.Cl do report relative membrane voltage of hydra cells, we compared the average arrival time of old mortal hydra dyed with FluoVolt, VF2.1.Cl, or the V_mem-insensitive dye VF2.0.Cl.

[PAGE 5] Immortal hydra have bioelectrically distinct body parts
In order to find the consensus bioelectric atlas of immortal hydra, we imaged hydra growing at 22°C with the V_mem-sensitive dye FluoVolt.

[PAGE 5] Hydra age at 10°C
In order to confirm whether hydra age at 10°C, we looked for ovaries or testes on the body of the hydra since gametogenesis in these hydra is a sign of irreversible aging.70,82

[PAGE 5] Aging hydra have bioelectrically different bodies than immortal hydra
In order to test whether aging and immortal hydra have bioelectrically distinct bodies, we grew cultures of hydra in 10°C versus 22°C incubators for 4 months and imaged the relative membrane voltage across the hydras' bodies using the V_mem-sensitive dye FluoVolt.

[PAGE 5] Discussion
This study provides a consensus whole-body bioelectric atlas of living immortal and mortal hydra.

[PAGE 10] Acknowledgments
We thank the Brigitte Galliot's Lab for providing the CS H. oligactis; Erin Switzer for providing the artemia brine shrimps; Hamid Sediqi for sharing the code for calculating Moran's I; Aviva Lucas-Demott and Alexandra Griffin for helping maintain the hydra; and Julia Poirier for assistance with the article.