The energetics of cellular life transitions
Anna S. Monzel1, D, Michael Levin2,3,4, Martin Picard1,5,6,7,*
1Department of Psychiatry, Division of Behavioral Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032,
United States
2Department of Biology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, United States
3Allen Discovery Center at Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, United States
4Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston, MA 02115, United States
5Department of Neurology, H. Houston Merritt Center, Columbia Translational Neuroscience Initiative, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University
Irving Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, United States
'New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY 10032, United States
'Robert N Butler Columbia Aging Center, Columbia University Mailman School of Public Health, New York, NY 10032, United States
*Corresponding author. Department of Psychiatry, Division of Behavioral Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University Irving Medical Center,
New York, NY 10032, United States. E-mail: martin.picard@columbia.edu

[PAGE 1] Abstract
Major life transitions are always difficult because change costs energy. Recent findings have demonstrated how mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) defects increase the energetic cost of living and that excessive integrated stress response (ISR) signaling may prevent cellular identity transitions during development. In this perspective, we discuss general bioenergetic principles of life transitions and the costly molecular processes involved in reprograming the cellular hardware/software as cells shift identity. The energetic cost of cellular differentiation has not been directly quantified, representing a gap in knowledge. We propose that the ISR is an energetic checkpoint evolved to (i) prevent OxPhos-deficient cells from engaging in excessively costly transitions and (ii) allow ISR-positive cells to recruit systemic energetic resources by signaling via GDF15 and the brain.

Keywords: energy; mitochondria; signaling pathway; growth differentiation factor 15; energy balance; development

Thermodynamic principles stipulate that without the input of energy, a system is doomed to either drift toward increasing entropy or to remain in its initial state. For this reason, any type of change must consume energy. In other words, change costs energy. But living cells and organisms constantly face the need for change, including energetically costly transitions from one cellular state to another, or from one position to another within the organism [1]. Bearing adequate resources, all developing cells and subpopulations of adult cells must, at some point, transition from their relatively undifferentiated pluripotent identity to some "terminal" specialized identity. Therefore, understanding the core subcellular mechanisms that monitor a cell's energetic status and that also energetically sustain their challenging life transitions, has the potential to uncover biological principles that are the basis of human health, or that falter in diseases.


[PAGE 1] Life transitions cost energy
Life transitions and identity changes are always difficult. This principle applies across levels of complexity: molecules rearrange or break down via endergonic chemical reactions, pluripotent cells transition from a stem-like state into a terminally differentiated identity, and complex conscious organisms are forced to transition from one developmental life stage to another [2]. The difficulty with transitions likely emerges from the activation energy barriers that must be overcome to achieve change (Fig. 1). In the same way that many enzymes require activation energy (e.g., ATP, NAD(P)H, and others) to power the molecular transition of substrate A into product B, the human mind and body require inputting energy to power all meaningful life transitions. For instance, major life transitions such as moving into a new home or changing one's social relationship(s) all come with some degree of uncontrollability, leading to psychobiological stress [3]. The neuroendocrine stress responses engendered by the resulting uncomfortable psychological states consume considerable amounts of energy [4]. As a result, major life and organismal transitions must be energetically costly.

The most energetically costly period of human life-where whole-body energy expenditure normalized per unit of body mass is the highest-is between ages 1 and 15 [5]. This period is replete with changes as the infant develops an identity as a child and later transitions into adolescence and adulthood. Over this critical life stage, the body undergoes phases of rapid growth and biomass accumulation, as well as pruning and establishing billions of neural connections. In parallel, major psychobiological changes must occur as personality and the ego or "I" develop, occurring alongside life-defining anatomical, physiological, and hormonal changes (Fig. 2a, top). Interestingly, this costly developmental transition through adolescence is marked by the highest risk of onset for mental health disorders [7]. The individual vulnerability around this period of high energy demand suggests that competing demands for limited energetic resources could interfere with developmental processes, resilience, and health [8]. Below, we focus our discussion on life transitions at the cellular level. Similar to human life transitions, cellular maturation and identity changes operate under the same principles and face similarly costly challenges. But, cellular transitions occur at a scale amenable to the scientific scalpel of molecular biology and the precise mechanistic dissection it affords. Thus, understanding the energetic principles that guide these processes may yield new insights into the energetic forces and molecular pathways that monitor and constrain differentiation.


[PAGE 2] Changes required for cellular and tissue-level transitions
One of the hallmarks of multicellular organisms is that the activity of individual cells is harnessed toward broader organismal goals. This includes creating complex anatomical structures and morphologies (i.e., morphospace) [9]. Starting from the fertilized egg, all descendants of that cell must differentiate, migrate, and cooperate with each other to eventually reach the possible region with configurations that correspond to the normal species-specific anatomy. Yet, after differentiation, cells keep changing and adapting in response to environmental cues. They are constantly actively monitoring their state, computing errors from their final position and function, and working to reduce those errors [10-12]. These energy-consuming actions require reprogrammability.

While genomes encode the specific hardware that each cell has access to (via the proteins specified by the DNA sequence and chromatin state), the behavior of each cell and the cell collective is driven by the physiological software that supervenes on the hardware [13, 14]. Note that the hardware-software analogy used here and in synthetic bioengineering and evolutionary developmental biology [15-17] refers not to the anthropomorphic origin of some (but no longer all [18]) software but rather refers to the fact that the exact same hardware (genomically determined cellular components) can give rise to numerous different outcomes. Just like the same physical computer hardware can run or execute vastly different software (text processing, video streaming, etc.).

A cell's hardware includes the proteins encoded by the sequences of its genome that are epigenetically "open" and active or "closed" and repressed, plus the complex set of organelles, proteins, and molecules it contains at any given time [19]. The cell's software includes the program(s) executed by the hardware, which comprise biomechanical [20-22], bioelectrical [23-25], and transcriptional [26-28] dynamics.


[PAGE 4] Stress and energy allocation
As introduced above, stress responses necessarily cost energy [4]. The term "stress" refers to any type of response that catalyzes change within a complex system, such as a transition from state Y to Z (e.g., resting to activated). Stress is often caused by external "stressors" that force a cell or organism to adapt and change its state. But stress is also triggered by internal processes, like a developmental trajectory that requires a cell to shift identity [36] or by the accumulation of damage during aging [37, 38].

Importantly, the costs of stress and other processes are generally cumulative. This means that the energy required to power hardware/software reprogramming during cellular transitions must come on top of what is required at baseline to prevent entropy and sustain life [39]. Thus, while a developing cell naturally expends energy to maintain integrity, it also must deploy energetically expensive molecular processes required to shift its identity toward its terminal state, adding to the energetic cost of life.


[PAGE 4] Mitochondria, energy, and questions around cell fate transitions
Aerobic mammalian cells derive most of their usable energy from the oxidative phosphorylation (OxPhos) system within mitochondria. The OxPhos system pulls and reacts hydrocarbon-derived electrons with oxygen to build a transmembrane charge that powers ATP syn-thesis. For this reason, mitochondria naturally play a permissive role in sustaining life and enabling all psychobiological life transitions [44].

By producing ATP on demand-that is, when ATP is hydrolyzed into ADP and inorganic phosphate-mitochondria essentially "keep the lights on", enabling life's vital operations. But an important ques-tion is whether beyond its permissive role, energy transformation by mitochondrial OxPhos also plays an instructive role in shaping major cellular transitions, including differentiation from a stem-like pre-cursor cell type to a terminally differentiated state.


[PAGE 5] The mitochondrial ISR
The ISR, sometimes referred to as the mitochondrial ISR (ISRmt), is an evolutionarily conserved intracellular signal-ing network triggered in response to several environmental and cell-intrinsic stressors, including but not limited to nutri-ent deprivation, infections, misfolded proteins, and oxidative stresses [61, 62]. Upon stress signaling, phosphorylation of the translation initiation factor 2 (eIF2) signals through CHOP [CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) homology protein] (Ddit3) [63] and activating transcription factors Atf4 and Atf5 to upregulate the expression of several downstream genes [61, 64] (Fig. 2b). Other stress signal transduction cascades may also converge on the ISR [65]. The epistatic network of relationships among ISR genes is still being uncovered in different species and cell types.


[PAGE 5] Reductive stress triggers the ISR
In the recent study of the developing mouse lung [6], deleting Ndufs2 in transitional epithelial cells triggered robust ISR activa-tion, monitored by the expression of ~120 genes including Gdf15. Most of these genes were induced at levels above the expression levels naturally induced in healthy transitional lung epithelial cells, suggesting that the OxPhos defects tapped into the same pathway. However, in this case, the OxPhos defects amplified this pathway to a point where the ISR became maladaptive or pathological.


[PAGE 5] Physiological roles of the ISR
Whereas some of the triggers of the ISR are relatively well defined in some contexts, what have remained less well established are the functional consequences of the ISR. Why did the ISR evolve? And what role does the ISR play in normal development and physiology, and in the pathophysiology of primary mitochondrial disorders and other diseases? Below, we summarize three possi-ble, non-mutually exclusive interpretations.


[PAGE 6] The ISR as pathology
The first and simplest interpretation is that the ISR is mostly activated under pathological conditions, playing little role in nor-mal physiology.


[PAGE 6] The ISR as a cellular developmental checkpoint
A second related developmental proposition is that robust ISR activation evolved to prevent energetically compromised cells from engaging in excessively costly cell fate transitions.


[PAGE 6] The ISR as a brain-body signaling mechanism
Let us remember that all mammalian nuclear programs and sign-aling pathways, including the ISR, must have evolved to optimize the fitness of the organism. The organism, not single cells, is the ultimate unit of natural selection.


[PAGE 7] Conclusion
Life transitions are inherently "stressful" because they cost energy. OxPhos defects appear to increase the cost of life in cells, animals, and people [57, 58]. This likely occurs because cells that contain OxPhos-deficient mitochondria must bend their metab-olism and behaviors out of shape, forced to induce and utilize less optimal metabolic strategies to survive.  The ISR itself triggers costly genetic programs leading to metabokine protein synthesis, secretion, cell-cell signaling, and even somato-cognitive (i.e., body-brain) signaling that conveys systemic energetic distress to the brain [66].