Machine learning for hypothesis generation in biology and medicine: exploring the latent space of neuroscience and developmental bioelectricity
Thomas O'Brien,ª Joel Stremmel, Da Léo Pio-Lopez,♭ Patrick McMillen,b Cody Rasmussen-Ivey♭ and Michael Levin D *bc

[PAGE 2] Introduction
The scientific enterprise depends critically not only on the skills needed to definitively test crisp hypotheses,1-7 but also on the much less well-understood step of acquiring insights and fruitful research directions.⁸⁻⁹ Many recent discussions¹⁰,¹¹ have focused on the fact that while modern "big data" methods are generating a deluge of facts and measurements, it is increasingly more important to be “building the edifice of science, in addition to throwing bricks into the yard".¹² In other words, it is essential that we develop strategies for deriving novel insights and deep hypotheses that cross traditional (in many cases, artificial) boundaries between disciplines. We must improve, at a pace that keeps up with technological and data science advances, our ability to identify symmetries (invariances) between sets of observations and approaches to unify and simplify where possible by identifying large-scale patterns in research literature and thus motivate and enhance new research programs (Fig. 1).

One set of tools that is being rapidly developed and ubiquitously deployed originates in the advances of the field of artificial intelligence.¹³⁻¹⁵ Machine learning is clearly poised to help science.¹⁴,¹⁶⁻¹⁹ It is becoming widely recognized that “robot scientist" platforms can not only provide number crunching, automation, and high throughput, but could potentially also guide research by identifying what experiments to do next.²⁰⁻²² Machine learning tools have been suggested to be essential for progress in the bioinformatics of shape²³⁻²⁶ (moving beyond molecular information to understand organ- and organism-level form and function), and developmental biology.²⁷,²⁸ Not surprisingly, much emphasis is currently placed on improving the factuality of the output of AI tools; this parallels the well-developed notions of strong inference and hypothesis-testing in science: the well-established algorithm of falsifying and removing incorrect ideas. What is much less well-understood, but ultimately as crucial, is the process that provides a pool of interesting hypotheses from which to winnow until provisional truths are found. Our contribution attempts to bolster this second component of the scientific process – ideation – with a new AI-based tool for human scientists that provides input into the canonical scientific method.

Recent work in this field includes the AI-based discovery of testable models of regenerative anatomical regulation,²⁹ which were subsequently empirically validated,³⁰ and similar efforts in genomics,²² chemistry³¹,³² and biomaterials.³³ One of the most potentially important current gaps is the paucity of tools for assisting with the most creative aspect of the work: identifying deep commonalities between disparate functional datasets, to enable generalized insight from the ever-growing literature. Tools are needed that would take meta-hypotheses of human scientists and mine the published studies for information that can be used to turn those conceptual hunches into actionable research programs.


[PAGE 3] 
One interdisciplinary area in which computer-assisted discovery would be most welcome is real-time physiology that controls form and function in vivo. How large-scale anatomy and behavior arises from the operation of molecular processes is a canonical systems biology problem.³⁴ It is currently handled by two distinct fields, with their own educational tracks, conferences, journals, funding bodies, and paradigms: neuroscience and developmental biology. Interestingly however, recent work has suggested that these may share an important underlying set of dynamics.³⁵⁻³⁷ Neuroscience has long understood that behavior and cognition are driven by the physiological information processing by neural networks, which signal via electrical events at their membranes.³⁸⁻⁴¹ Likewise, a long history of classical work has suggested that bioelectric signaling of all kinds of cells is required as an instructive set of influences that help direct complex developmental and regenerative morphogenesis.⁴²⁻⁴⁴ Interestingly, recent advances in the molecular understanding of developmental bioelectricity⁴⁵⁻⁴⁷ has begun to blur the boundaries between those disciplines⁴⁸,⁴⁹ (Fig. 2).

Specifically, it has been conjectured that the immense functional capabilities of brains have their origin in the more ancient, and slower, bioelectric networks that began operation at the emergence of bacterial biofilms⁵⁰⁻⁵⁴ and were heavily exploited by evolution to orchestrate metazoan morphogenesis.⁵⁵,⁵⁶ The idea that the same algorithms for scaling cellular activity into larger competencies (such as regulative morphogenesis and intelligent behavior) are used in the brain and in the body (Fig. 3) has many deep implications, for example with respect to porting methods from neuroscience and behavioral science into biomedicine,³⁵,⁵⁷,⁵⁸ to take advantage of neuroscience's successful paradigms for managing multi-scale causality and inferring effective interventions.

The proposed symmetry between cellular swarms using collective dynamics to solve problems in anatomical morphospace and in 3D classical behavioral space has been empirically tested in specific contexts,³⁴,⁴⁷ and has significant implications for biomedicine and evolutionary biology.⁵⁹,⁶⁰ However, there has been no way to derive these hypotheses at scale from the plethora of functional literature of neuroscience and developmental biophysics. Specifically, it has been claimed that the deep similarity between the role of bioelectric networks in control of body shape (cellular collectives' behavior) and cognition (organism-level behavior) enables one to readily read neuroscience papers as if they were developmental biology papers, by only pivoting problem spaces (from 3D space to anatomical morphospace) and time scales (from milliseconds to minutes).⁴⁹,⁵⁶ However, there has never been an efficient way to implement this conjecture and actually explore the latent space of hypothetical papers that could provide candidate hypotheses and potentially fruitful research directions.

Here, we provide a first-generation tool, FieldSHIFT, that helps human scientists explore the mapping between developmental bioelectricity and neuroscience and begins the journey towards exploring the space of scientific studies far wider than what has already been written. FieldSHIFT is an in-context learning framework which uses a large language model to convert existing paper abstracts in neuroscience to the field of developmental biology, by appropriately replacing specific words and concepts. We show that this process generates useful, readable, insightful results that can be used to expand scientific intuition and identify testable hypotheses for novel work at the intersection of two fields. Furthermore, we test some of the resulting predictions using a bioinformatics approach, revealing a remarkable quantitative conservation of genes between developmental morphogenesis and cognitive behavior. The described system is a first step on the road to using AI tools as an imagination enhancing tool for research, deriving novel insights from expensive published experiments and letting scientists explore life-as-it-could be.⁶¹ We tested one of the predictions of its output, finding a quantitatively significant enrichment in overlap between specific genes implicated in both cognitive processes and morphogenesis.

There have been a handful of related research efforts using generative AI for hypothesis generation and cross-domain knowledge discovery. One such approach is MechGPT, a large language model for identifying and probing analogous concepts between scientific domains.⁶² Other approaches have focused on knowledge discovery across scientific domains, such as⁶³ for translating between protein sequences and music note sequences with attention-based deep neural networks and for identifying new designs within the field of mechanical engineering via cross-domain patent mining using knowledge graphs and natural language processing. Our method focuses uniquely on generating scientific hypotheses in the form of abstracts via text translations.

[PAGE 4] Methods
...(Content from Extraction 3's Methods section)...

[PAGE 5] Data
...(Content from Extraction 3's Data section)...

[PAGE 6] 
...(Content from Extraction 3's page 6, including training/testing split, Domain translation with machine learning, and Transformer LMs)...


[PAGE 7] Model training
...(Content from Extraction 5's Model Training section)...

[PAGE 8] 
...(Content from Extraction 5's page 8 about GPT-4)...


[PAGE 9] Model validation
...(Content from Extraction 3's Model Validation section, incorporating the Google Scholar query details from Extraction 5)...

[PAGE 9] Results
...(Content from Extraction 3's Results section)...

[PAGE 11] Hypothesis testing: molecular conservation between cognition and morphogenesis
...(Content from Extraction 3's Hypothesis Testing section)...

[PAGE 12] Discussion
...(Content from Extraction 3's Discussion section, incorporating citation 99 from Extraction 4 and citations 100, 101 from Extraction 4)...

[PAGE 13] Limitations of the study and next steps
...(Content from Extraction 3's Limitations section)...


[PAGE 13] Conclusion
...(Content from Extraction 3's Conclusion section)...