[PAGE 1] Machine learning for hypothesis generation in biology and medicine: exploring the latent space of neuroscience and developmental bioelectricity

[PAGE 2] Introduction

The scientific enterprise depends critically not only on the skills needed to definitively test crisp hypotheses,1-7 but also on the much less well-understood step of acquiring insights and fruitful research directions.” Many recent discussions 10,11 have focused on the fact that while modern "big data" methods are generating a deluge of facts and measurements, it is increasingly more important to be “building the edifice of science, in addition to throwing bricks into the yard". 12 In other words, it is essential that we develop strategies for deriving novel insights and deep hypotheses that cross traditional (in many cases, artificial) boundaries between disciplines. We must improve, at a pace that keeps up with technological and data science advances, our ability to identify symmetries (invariances) between sets of observations and approaches to unify and simplify where possible by identifying large-scale patterns in research literature and thus motivate and enhance new research programs (Fig. 1).

One set of tools that is being rapidly developed and ubiquitously deployed originates in the advances of the field of artificial intelligence.13-15 Machine learning is clearly poised to help science. 14,16-19 It is becoming widely recognized that “robot scientist" platforms can not only provide number crunching, automation, and high throughput, but could potentially also guide research by identifying what experiments to do next. 20-22 Machine learning tools have been suggested to be essential for progress in the bioinformatics of shape23-26 (moving beyond molecular information to understand organ- and organism-level form and function), and developmental biology.27,28 Not surprisingly, much emphasis is currently placed on improving the factuality of the output of AI tools; this parallels the well-developed notions of strong inference and hypothesis-testing in science: the well-established algorithm of falsifying and removing incorrect ideas. What is much less well-understood, but ultimately as crucial, is the process that provides a pool of interesting hypotheses from which to winnow until provisional truths are found. Our contribution attempts to bolster this second component of the scientific process ideation with a new AI-based tool for human scientists that provides input into the canonical scientific method.

Recent work in this field includes the AI-based discovery of testable models of regenerative anatomical regulation,29 which were subsequently empirically validated, 3º and similar efforts in genomics, 22 chemistry31,32 and biomaterials.33 One of the most potentially important current gaps is the paucity of tools for assisting with the most creative aspect of the work: identifying deep commonalities between disparate functional datasets, to enable generalized insight from the ever-growing literature. Tools are needed that would take meta-hypotheses of human scientists and mine the published studies for information that can be used to turn those conceptual hunches into actionable research programs.


[PAGE 3] 

One interdisciplinary area in which computer-assisted discovery would be most welcome is real-time physiology that controls form and function in vivo. How large-scale anatomy and behavior arises from the operation of molecular processes is a canonical systems biology problem.“ It is currently handled by two distinct fields, with their own educational tracks, conferences, journals, funding bodies, and paradigms: neuroscience and developmental biology. Interestingly however, recent work has suggested that these may share an important underlying set of dynamics.35-37 Neuroscience has long understood that behavior and cognition are driven by the physiological information processing by neural networks, which signal via electrical events at their membranes. 38-41 Likewise, a long history of classical work has suggested that bioelectric signaling of all kinds of cells is required as an instructive set of influences that help direct complex developmental and regenerative morphogenesis. 42-44 Interestingly, recent advances in the molecular understanding of developmental bioelectricity 45-47 has begun to blur the boundaries between those disciplines 48,49 (Fig. 2).

Specifically, it has been conjectured that the immense functional capabilities of brains have their origin in the more ancient, and slower, bioelectric networks that began operation at the emergence of bacterial biofilms50-54 and were heavily exploited by evolution to orchestrate metazoan morphogenesis. 55,56 The idea that the same algorithms for scaling cellular activity into larger competencies (such as regulative morphogenesis and intelligent behavior) are used in the brain and in the body (Fig. 3) has many deep implications, for example with respect to porting methods from neuroscience and behavioral science into biomedicine, 35,57,58 to take advantage of neuroscience's successful paradigms for managing multi-scale causality and inferring effective interventions.


[PAGE 4] Methods

We propose FieldSHIFT: a framework for domain translation with modular components in the form of training data and an AI language model for mapping text from one domain to another. We constructed a dataset of neuroscience and developmental biology sentences and associated concepts to test FieldSHIFT with two AI language models. We used trained biologists to both build the dataset and evaluate the model translations. While we focused on mapping neuroscience to developmental biology text, we believe a similar approach could be taken to apply FieldSHIFT to other domains.

[PAGE 5] Data

As an exercise with students and other researchers, the Levin Lab has been translating neuroscience to development biology, by hand, for several decades. They'd do this by changing concepts like "brain" to "body", "millisecond" to "minute", and "neuron" to "cell". We collected 70 such translation pairs. Using these concept pairs, we constructed translations varying from one sentence to abstract-length paragraphs by matching neuroscience passages with corresponding developmental biology passages. These passages include a variety of text from facts about these scientific domains to recently published abstracts from neuroscience and developmental biology articles.

[PAGE 6] 

We collected 1437 translation samples in total. The average length of a sample input or output passage is 209 characters, and the standard deviation is 375. Below is an example pair pertaining to "brain” as the neuroscience concept and "body" as the developmental biology concept:

Neuroscience: “The brain is a complex system of neurons that are interconnected by synapses."
Developmental Biology: “The body is a complex system of cells that are interconnected by gap junctions."

In addition to translations, in some cases we added the same developmental biology abstract as both input and output examples. The goal was to teach a model trained on these examples not to change anything in the case that development biology text is provided as input. 

[PAGE 6] Domain translation with machine learning

We implemented and tested two domain translation approaches for research paper abstracts using pretrained language models to identify a suitable backend model for FieldSHIFT. The first is inspired by neural machine translation (NMT) and abstractive summarization and uses the open-source BART¹ pretrained Transformer language model (LM).72


[PAGE 7] 

We continued fine-tuning the pretrained BART LM¹ first fine-tuned as an abstractive summarizer (and available via Hugging Face transformers) for domain translation by feeding the summarizer text pairs specific to our translation task. 

[PAGE 8] 

To use the GPT-4 LLM as a domain-translator, we provided in-context examples and asked the LLM to complete the pattern.

[PAGE 8] Model validation

For each test concept in our domain translation dataset, we searched the term and chose the first abstract that included the term. 

[PAGE 9] Bioinformatics

We extracted the whole set of the unique genes related to gene ontologies 'Developmental process' (GO:0032502) and 'Behavior' (GO:0007610) in humans, Drosophila, the zebrafish (Danio rerio), and the mice (Mus musculus) using Ensembl database and computed the percentage of genes of 'Behavior' included in the set of genes annotated as 'Developmental process'. 

[PAGE 9] Results
Comparing domain translators

A quantitative evaluation of domain translation methods via human annotation suggests the effectiveness of ML-based domain translation. 

[PAGE 11] Hypothesis testing: molecular conservation between cognition and morphogenesis
One clear hypothesis that can be generated by FieldSHIFT is that the molecular mechanisms behind developmental bioelectricity and that of cognitive/behavioral phenomena should be conserved. 

[PAGE 12] Discussion
Machine learning for domain translation
We proposed FieldSHIFT, a framework for domain translation. 


[PAGE 12] Bioelectricity: conserved mechanisms and algorithms between control of body and behavior

It has been previously hypothesized that the algorithms of behavior (active inference, perceptual control, collective decision-making, memory and learning, navigation of problem spaces, preferences, pursuit of goal states with degrees of flexible response, etc.) are used to direct morphogenesis and may even derive from it evolutionarily. 

[PAGE 12] Latent space of scientific papers

We believe that this work is just the beginning of the AI-guided exploration of the latent space around scientific papers, in the sense of the "adjacent possible”. 

[PAGE 13] Limitations of the study and next steps
One limitation of the study is the number of papers we were able to manually curate; the machine learning will improve as more papers are added in the future. 

[PAGE 13] Conclusion

The increased overlap we observed between genes implicated in morphogenesis and behavior has a number of implications for experimental work on the evolution and biomedical targeting of many of those genes.