Machine learning for hypothesis generation in biology and
medicine: exploring the latent space of neuroscience and
developmental bioelectricity

[PAGE 2] Introduction
The scientific enterprise depends critically not only on the skills
needed to definitively test crisp hypotheses,1-7 but also on the
much less well-understood step of acquiring insights and
fruitful research directions.” Many recent discussions 10,11 have
focused on the fact that while modern "big data" methods are
generating a deluge of facts and measurements, it is increas-
ingly more important to be “building the edifice of science, in
addition to throwing bricks into the yard". 12 In other words, it is
essential that we develop strategies for deriving novel insights
and deep hypotheses that cross traditional (in many cases,
artificial) boundaries between disciplines. We must improve, at
a pace that keeps up with technological and data science
advances, our ability to identify symmetries (invariances)
between sets of observations and approaches to unify and
simplify where possible by identifying large-scale patterns in
research literature and thus motivate and enhance new research
programs (Fig. 1).
One set of tools that is being rapidly developed and ubiqui-
tously deployed originates in the advances of the field of arti-
ficial intelligence.13-15 Machine learning is clearly poised to help
science. 14,16-19 It is becoming widely recognized that “robot
scientist" platforms can not only provide number crunching,
automation, and high throughput, but could potentially also
guide research by identifying what experiments to do next. 20-22
Machine learning tools have been suggested to be essential for
progress in the bioinformatics of shape23-26 (moving beyond
molecular information to understand organ- and organism-
level form and function), and developmental biology.27,28 Not
surprisingly, much emphasis is currently placed on improving
the factuality of the output of AI tools; this parallels the well-
developed notions of strong inference and hypothesis-testing
in science: the well-established algorithm of falsifying and
removing incorrect ideas. What is much less well-understood,
but ultimately as crucial, is the process that provides a pool of
interesting hypotheses from which to winnow until provisional
truths are found. Our contribution attempts to bolster this
second component of the scientific process ideation with
a new AI-based tool for human scientists that provides input
into the canonical scientific method.
Recent work in this field includes the AI-based discovery of
testable models of regenerative anatomical regulation,29 which
were subsequently empirically validated, 3º and similar efforts in
genomics, 22 chemistry31,32 and biomaterials.33 One of the most
potentially important current gaps is the paucity of tools for
assisting with the most creative aspect of the work: identifying
deep commonalities between disparate functional datasets, to
enable generalized insight from the ever-growing literature.
Tools are needed that would take meta-hypotheses of human
scientists and mine the published studies for information that
can be used to turn those conceptual hunches into actionable
research programs.

[PAGE 3] One interdisciplinary area in which computer-assisted
discovery would be most welcome is real-time physiology that
controls form and function in vivo. How large-scale anatomy and
behavior arises from the operation of molecular processes is
a canonical systems biology problem.“ It is currently handled by
two distinct fields, with their own educational tracks, confer-
ences, journals, funding bodies, and paradigms: neuroscience
and developmental biology. Interestingly however, recent work
has suggested that these may share an important underlying set
of dynamics.35-37 Neuroscience has long understood that
behavior and cognition are driven by the physiological informa-
tion processing by neural networks, which signal via electrical

[PAGE 4] Methods
We propose FieldSHIFT: a framework for domain translation
with modular components in the form of training data and an
AI language model for mapping text from one domain to
another. We constructed a dataset of neuroscience and devel-
opmental biology sentences and associated concepts to test
FieldSHIFT with two AI language models. We used trained
biologists to both build the dataset and evaluate the model
translations. While we focused on mapping neuroscience to
developmental biology text, we believe a similar approach could
be taken to apply FieldSHIFT to other domains.


[PAGE 5] Data
As an exercise with students and other researchers, the Levin
Lab has been translating neuroscience to development biology,

[PAGE 6] Domain translation with machine learning
We implemented and tested two domain translation
approaches for research paper abstracts using pretrained
language models to identify a suitable backend model for
FieldSHIFT. 

[PAGE 7] Model training
Here we describe the core ideas and training procedures for the
two domain translation models we used within FieldSHIFT:
fine-tuned BART and GPT-4.


[PAGE 8] Model validation
For each test concept in our domain translation dataset, we
searched the term and chose the first abstract that included the
term. 

[PAGE 9] Results
Comparing domain translators
A quantitative evaluation of domain translation methods via
human annotation suggests the effectiveness of ML-based
domain translation. 

[PAGE 9] Bioinformatics
We extracted the whole set of the unique genes related to gene
ontologies 'Developmental process' (GO:0032502) and
'Behavior' (GO:0007610) in humans, Drosophila, the zebrafish
(Danio rerio), and the mice (Mus musculus) using Ensembl

[PAGE 11] Hypothesis testing: molecular conservation between
cognition and morphogenesis
One clear hypothesis that can be generated by FieldSHIFT is
that the molecular mechanisms behind developmental

[PAGE 12] Discussion
Machine learning for domain translation
We proposed FieldSHIFT, a framework for domain translation.

[PAGE 12] Bioelectricity: conserved mechanisms and algorithms
between control of body and behavior
It has been previously hypothesized that the algorithms of

[PAGE 12] Latent space of scientific papers
We believe that this work is just the beginning of the AI-guided


[PAGE 13] Limitations of the study and next steps
One limitation of the study is the number of papers we were able to
manually curate; 

[PAGE 13] Conclusion
The increased overlap we observed between genes implicated in
morphogenesis and behavior has a number of implications for