Life, its origin, and its distribution: a perspective
from the Conway-Kochen Theorem and the Free
Energy Principle
Chris Fields & Michael Levin

[PAGE 2] ABSTRACT
We argue here that the Origin of Life (OOL) problem is not just a chemistry problem but is also, and primarily, a cognitive science problem. When interpreted through the lens of the Conway-Kochen theorem and the Free Energy Principle, contemporary physics characterizes all complex dynamical systems that persist through time as Bayesian agents. If all persistent systems are to some - perhaps only minimal – extent cognitive, are all persistent systems to some extent alive, or are living systems only a subset of cognitive systems? We argue that no bright line can be drawn, and we re-assess, from this perspective, the Fermi paradox and the Drake equation. We conclude that improving our abilities to recognize and communicate with diverse intelligences in diverse embodiments, whether based on familiar biochemistry or not, will either resolve or obviate the OOL problem.

[PAGE 2] 1. Introduction
The Origin of Life (OOL) problem is ordinarily thought of as a chemistry problem [1]: how can the right molecules, under the right conditions, be compartmentalized in a way that initiates an autocatalytic process that maintains not just the right molecular concentrations, but also the enabling conditions and the requisite compartmentalization? Many ideas have been suggested, typically focused on either autocatalysis or compartmentalization as the primary problem. It is widely believed that multiple OOL events could have occurred on the early Earth, with only one lineage – that of the last universal common ancestor (LUCA) of all known life – surviving [2-4]. It is also widely believed that OOL events could occur elsewhere, prompting searches for evidence of extraterrestrial life by various means.

The OOL event leading to LUCA and its lineage is important in a number of related fields. First, it represents an originating singularity that must back-stop the reproductive cycle that is a cornerstone of evolutionary biology. Second, by effectively defining "synthetic" life, it sets a boundary condition on synthetic biology and bioengineering, both efforts to create and study life-as-it-could be [5] in novel implementations. Third, it is a critical fixed point for exo-biology, pushing us to define what it is that we are looking for on worlds beyond our planet, and to construct models of what different origin stories would mean for the further development of complexity and intelligence. Most crucially, it strongly impacts the very definition of "life": a standard account in which life is a distinct category set apart from non-living matter is challenged by the need to identify and explain a sharp phase transition in which life arose from non-life. Related to this are questions of the relationship of life and mind. Whatever theories we formulate for the minimal dynamics needed to create minds, it is imperative to understand their relationship to the OOL. The conventional view is that cognition arose at some point during life's expansion along an axis of complexity, i.e. that cognitive beings are a subset of living beings [6].

Here, we review an alternative way of thinking about the OOL problem that is motivated by the Conway-Kochen (CK) theorem [7,8], a result in fundamental physics, and the Free Energy Principle (FEP), a theoretical framework that originated in neuroscience [9,10] and has been extended over the past decade into a description of generic physical systems [11-16]. The CK theorem characterizes all physical systems as agential in the specific sense of displaying behavior that is not, even in principle, predictable from local causal influences. The FEP characterizes all physical systems as inferential in the specific sense of behaving as Bayesian satisficers. Together, the CK theorem and the FEP suggest a view of cognition that is substantially broader than mainstream views in biology, e.g. as represented in [6], and may even surprise advocates of basal cognition in, e.g. plants or microbes [17-21]. They suggest, in particular, that all complex systems are organizations of agential materials that perform Bayesian satisficing on multiple scales [22-24]. This in turn suggests that the OOL problem is not, or at least not just, a chemistry problem, but is rather a cognitive science problem: the problem of characterizing the level or type of cognition at which it becomes meaningful for a system to be considered living. It raises the questions of whether life and cognition are co-extensive, as many have argued [25-28], and of what specific attributes distinguish living cognitive systems from non-living cognitive systems if they are not. It suggests that developing methods to both identify and communicate with diverse intelligences with diverse embodiments that exhibit behavior in diverse state spaces [22,29–31] will be required to fully address the OOL problem.

[PAGE 3] 2. The Conway-Kochen theorem as a generic characterization of agency
In 2006, John Conway and Simon Kochen published their "free will theorem"; they published a more general, and hence stronger, version in 2009. The CK theorem concerns interactions between an observer and some system of interest that comply with both Special Relativity (SR) and Quantum Theory (QT). The former requires that interactions between system and observer are causal, in the specific sense of transferring information between systems i) forward in time and ii) at no more than the speed of light; indeed compliance with these two conditions define "causality" in SR. 

The CK theorem shows us that, at least in the context of current fundamental physics, all systems exhibit one of the typical hallmarks of living systems: their resistance to local, causal determination of behavior, and hence their ability to act in ways that are surprising. It is possible to write this off as "randomness” or “stochasticity" and hence to view it in essentially thermodynamic terms, but we note that doing so already provides the minimal requirement – a degree of autonomy for a system to exist on the spectrum of agency, which can then be scaled up into higher forms of intelligence (with greater historicity, metacognition, etc.) by the processes of evolution or engineering. Here, we follow Wheeler [34], Fuchs [35], and others in interpreting the CK theorem, and indeed QT generally, as implying that all systems have a fundamentally agentic character. We will describe one way of formulating this in the next section: if two systems are distinguishable – formally, if their joint state is not entangled – they have independent and hence "free" choice of computations to perform on, and hence semantics to assign to, their inputs [36]. That such freedom of interpretation is the basis of agency is a key tenant of 2nd-order cybernetics [37-39].

[PAGE 4] 3. The FEP as a generic characterization of cognition
The FEP describes the behavior of physical systems that can be distinguished from the environments in which they are embedded, and provides a criterion that such systems must satisfy in order to remain distinguishable from their environments over some period of time. It can be stated, in obviously tautological form, as the claim that any system that is distinguishable from its environment must behave in a way that maintains its distinguishability from its environment, from the perspective of an external observer, and possibly from its own perspective [11]. More technically, any such system must behave in a way that maintains the conditional statistical independence of its states from the states of its environment. The FEP describes the maintenance of conditional statistical independence as the asymptotic minimization of a variational free energy (VFE) [40] measured at the system environment boundary, and describes the minimization of VFE as Bayesian satisficing. Intuitively, VFE is a measure of the system's uncertainty about what its environment will do to it next; hence VFE can be interpreted as a measure of the stress imposed on the system by its environment, and Bayesian satisficing can be interpreted as deciding how best to relieve this stress. The FEP can thus be viewed as providing a dictionary for translating descriptions of behavior in the languages of either classical dynamical systems [11-14] or QT [15,16] into the languages of the cognitive, and when many agents are involved, the social sciences. We will, in what follows, consistently use the term “agent” to refer to a system compliant with both the CK theorem and the FEP, recognizing that the scope of this usage comprises all physical systems that remain distinct from their environments over some time period of interest, and that this scope is considerably broader than that of some other usages of this term; see [41] for a general review and [42] for a review specific to biology.


[PAGE 6] 4. Life = Cognition, or Life ⊂ Cognition?
By recasting fundamental physics in agentive language in a way that applies to all time-persistent systems, the CK theorem and the FEP erase any "bright lines" separating cognitive systems from the "merely physical" while providing a natural association between dynamic and cognitive complexity. Relatively simple, intuitively "dumb" systems like electrons or rocks are negligibly cognitive, complex, multicomponent systems like macromolecules, biochemical pathways, or cells are significantly cognitive, exhibiting features such as error correction, learning, and memory [22], while even more complex systems like octopi, humans, or ecosystems are even more cognitive; in all cases, to a kind and degree that must be determined by experiment [51]. Indeed without further limiting assumptions, the CK theorem and the FEP are consistent with the radical panpsychism proposed by philosophers such as Galen Strawson [52] or Philip Goff [53]; see [54] for a cross-cultural historical review and [22,50] for specific discussions. However, since neither the CK theorem nor the FEP are themselves theories of consciousness per se, they by no means require it (Fields, Albarracin, Friston, Kiefer, Ramstead, and Safron, in review).


[PAGE 7] RESULTS AND DISCUSSION (Combined Section - No separate "Results" section apparent)
Erasing the line between the “merely physical" and the cognitive immediately raises the question of where life fits in. Are we justified in identifying the living with the cognitive, as argued by Maturana and Varela [25] or Pattee [26], if doing so extends the meaning of "living system" to include everything that persists through time? How important are often-cited functions such as replication, metabolism, or compartmentalization to the definition of "life" [55]? How important is organic chemistry - is it the exclusive source of complex systems, or can other chemistries also generate complex systems autonomously? Is it even worth trying to define life in general terms, given just the single example of the lineage of LUCA [56]? 

[PAGE 7] 5. Where are they?
The Fermi Paradox – why we have never observed evidence of intelligent extraterrestrial life even though the observable universe is large enough that we might expect to – has been widely discussed since [72]. Webb [73] reviews 75 proposed solutions, while Gray [74] advances a general critique of the discussion. As Webb points out, however, both the statement of the paradox and its proposed solutions implicitly model extraterrestrial life as similar to human life, psychologically and culturally even if not biologically [75]. 

[PAGE 9] 6. The Drake Equation in light of the FEP
The Drake Equation estimates the number N of extraterrestrial intelligent systems detectable from Earth as  N = RfpnefififcL, where R is the rate of star formation, fp is the fraction of stars with planets, ne is the number of life-supporting planets per such star, fi, fi, and fc are the fractions of such planets that develop life, intelligent life, and technological cultures respectively, and L is the average time a technological culture is detectable [73]. The uncertainties in all of the factors except R and fc are very large, and published estimates of N vary by many orders of magnitude. 

[PAGE 10] 7. Conclusions
The OOL problem has been framed against a background of classical physics operating in classical spacetime, and assumes an abiotic environment that operates as a classical mechanism. The Conway-Kochen theorem and the Free Energy Principle challenge these assumptions, the former by showing that local determinism conflicts with known physics, and the latter by providing a formal interpretation of even classical dynamical systems as Bayesian agents. Taken together, the CK theorem and the FEP characterize physical systems as at least minimally agentive at every scale, and suggest that life, cognition, and complexity are both inseparable and ubiquitous. If this is the case, the OOL problem is replaced, in practice, with the problem of recognizing and successfully interacting with diverse intelligences in diverse embodiments, which may, but may not, involve familiar biochemistry.