Neuroevolution of decentralized decision-
making in N-bead swimmers leads to
scalable and robust collective locomotion

Many microorganisms swim by performing larger non-reciprocal shape deformations that are initiated
locally by molecular motors. However, it remains unclear how decentralized shape control determines
the movement of the entire organism. Here, we investigate how efficient locomotion emerges from
coordinated yet simple and decentralized decision-making of the body parts using neuroevolution
techniques. Our approach allows us to investigate optimal locomotion policies for increasingly large
microswimmer bodies, with emerging long-wavelength body shape deformations corresponding to
surprisingly efficient swimming gaits. The obtained decentralized policies are robust and tolerant
concerning morphological changes or defects and can be applied to artificial microswimmers for
cargo transport or drug delivery applications without further optimization "out of the box". Our work is
of relevance to understanding and developing robust navigation strategies of biological and artificial
microswimmers and, in a broader context, for understanding emergent levels of individuality and the
role of collective intelligence in Artificial Life.

Microorganisms are ubiquitous in nature and play an essential role in many
biological phenomena, ranging from pathogenic bacteria affecting our
health to phytoplankton as a key player in the marine ecosystem on a global
scale. A large variety of microorganisms live in viscous environments, and
their motion is governed by the physics of low Reynolds number hydro-
dynamics, where viscous forces dominate over inertia¹⁻⁴. As a consequence,
a common strategy is to periodically deform their body shape in a non-
reciprocal fashion to swim. To thrive in the environment, they have
developed different tailored strategies to exploit their swimming capabilities,
such as actively navigating toward a nutrient-rich source, hunting down
prey, escaping predators, or reproducing⁵⁶. Besides being of direct biological
relevance, understanding the corresponding navigation strategies of
microorganisms bears potential for biomedical or technical applications,
potentially utilized by synthetic microswimmers deployed as targeted drug
delivery systems⁷⁻¹⁰.

Nature has evolved many different strategies and control mechanisms
for microswimmers to swim fast, efficiently, and adaptive to environmental
conditions: For example, swimming algae cells or sperm cells move with the
help of waving cilia or flagella¹¹, respectively, or amoebae such as
Dictyostelium¹² and unicellular protists such as Euglenia¹³ by deforming
their entire cell body. The associated deformation amplitudes and wave-
lengths can be on the order of the entire size of the organism.

In the last years, Reinforcement Learning¹⁴ (RL) has been applied to
understand navigation strategies of microswimmers¹⁵,¹⁶, for example under
external fluid flow¹⁷ or external fields¹⁸, or to perform chemotaxis in the
presence of chemical gradients¹⁹⁻²³. So far, most of these studies treat
microswimmers as rigid agents, i.e., explicitly omitting body deformations
or other internal degrees of freedom, and simply manipulate their ad hoc
swimming speed and rotation rates for control purposes to perform well in a
particular environment. Only very recent contributions¹⁹,²⁴⁻²⁹ consider the
constraints of physically force-free shape-deforming locomotion of plastic
model microswimmers in an effort to identify swimming gaits that explicitly
utilize the hydrodynamic interactions between different body parts in a
viscous environment. Modeling such a body-brain-environment offers
explicit and more realistic behavior of the response of an organism to
environmental conditions³⁰,³¹.

The locomotion of microswimmers and microrobots moving in viscous
fluids at low Reynolds numbers can be modeled with various numerical
methods of different accuracy. Examples for actively deforming slender fila-
ments as they occur in biological systems or in soft robotics are slender body
theory (e.g., ref. ³²), or Cosserat rod models (e.g., refs. ³³,³⁴). Yet the simplest
models, which usually outperform the aforementioned methods in terms of
computation time, discretize a filament or a microswimmer by inter-
connected beads where hydrodynamic interactions are captured in the

[PAGE 2] Results and discussion
The N-bead swimmer model

Here, we investigate swimming strategies optimized by RL and the corre-
sponding physical implications of N-bead generalized NG³⁵ swimmer
models moving in a fluid of viscosity μ. A swimmer consists of N co-
centrically aligned spheres of radius R located at positions xᵢ(tₖ), i = 1..., N,
at time tₖ. These beads are connected pairwise by massless arms of length
lᵢ(tₖ) = xᵢ₊₁(tₖ) - xᵢ(tₖ), as illustrated in Fig. 1a. The swimmer deforms and
moves by applying time-dependent forces Fᵢ(tₖ) = Fₐ(tₖ) + Fₚ(tₖ) on the
beads. The active forces Fₐ(tₖ) are proposed by RL agents (see below), and
passive restoring forces¹⁹Fₚ(tₖ) are applied when arm lengths lᵢ(tₖ) becomes
smaller than 0.7L₀, or lager than 1.3L₀, where we choose L₀ = 10R as
the reference arm length. The swimmer is force-free, ∑ᵢFᵢ(tₖ) = 0,
and the bead velocities vᵢ(tₖ) are obtained in the Oseen approximation⁶²,
vᵢ = Fᵢ/(6πμR) + ∑ⱼ≠ᵢFⱼ/(4πμ|xᵢ − xⱼ|), (see the “Hydrodynamic interactions
and numerical details for the N-bead swimmer model" subsection in the
"Methods").


[PAGE 2] Modeling system-level decision-making with decentralized
controllers

To identify the active forces Fₐ(tₖ) on the beads, we assign an ensemble of
independent yet identical controllers to every bead which respectively can
only perceive local information about adjacent beads (such as distances and
velocities of their neighbors) and propose actions to update their respective
states (such as proposing bead-specific forces to update their own posi-
tions). Yet, these bead-specific agents follow a shared objective to collec-
tively self-propel the entire N-bead swimmer's body. More specifically-as
illustrated in Fig. 1 and detailed in the "Artificial neural network-based
decentralized controllers" subsection in the "Methods"-for each time tₖ the
controller associated with the bead i perceives its left- and right-neighbor

[PAGE 3] Article

distances, Lᵢ(tₖ) = {lᵢ(tₖ), lᵢ₊₁(tₖ)}, and its own- and the neighboring
beads' velocities Vᵢ(tₖ) = {vᵢ₋₁(tₖ), vᵢ(tₖ), vᵢ₊₁(tₖ)}. Moreover, each bead
maintains an internal vector-valued state, sᵢ(tₖ). This state can be utilized by
the respective controller to store, update, and actively share recurrent
information with other beads that is not necessarily bound to the physical
state of the swimmer but an emergent property of the collective RL system:
Every controller thus perceives its neighboring states,
Sᵢ(tₖ) = {sᵢ₋₁(tₖ), sᵢ(tₖ), sᵢ₊₁(tₖ)}, which additionally guide the agent's
decision-making (see "Methods” and ref. ⁵⁸ for details). In total, the per-
ception of a single bead agent is given by pᵢ(tₖ) = {Lᵢ(tₖ), Vᵢ(tₖ), Sᵢ(tₖ)}
and does not contain any agent-specific or global reward signals.

After integrating information about its local environment, pᵢ(tₖ), the
controller of each bead i computes, and then outputs an action,
aᵢ(tₖ) = {Φᵢ(tₖ), ∆sᵢ(tₖ)}, comprising a proposed active force, Φᵢ(tₖ), and an
internal state update, sᵢ(tₖ₊₁) = sᵢ(tₖ) + ∆sᵢ(tₖ) (see Fig. 1b); this extends the
purely state sᵢ-dependent inverse pattern formation task discussed in ref. ⁵⁸
with local perception-action loops in a hydrodynamic environment. The
proposed forces are limited to Φᵢ(tₖ) ∈ [-F₀, F₀] by clamping the controllers'
force outputs to ±F₀, where F₀ sets the force scale in our system and hence
the maximum power consumption and bead velocities of the swimmer.

To model a force-free swimmer, we propose two different methods of
how the mapping between the proposed forces Φᵢ(tₖ), and the actual active
forces Fₐ(tₖ), is achieved: First, we interpret the proposed forces as pairwise
arm forces Φᵢ(tₖ) and -Φᵢ(tₖ) applied between two consecutive beads i and
i + 1, respectively (see Fig. 2a). This leads to the actual active forces Fₐ(tₖ) =
Φᵢ(tₖ) - Φᵢ₋₁(tₖ) for beads i = 1..., N, where we treat the swimmer's "head"
and "tail" separately by setting Φₙ(tₖ) = 0 and introducing Φ₀(tₖ) = 0. This
automatically ensures ∑ᵢ₌₁ⁿFᵢ(tₖ) = 0. In this sense, the proposed actions
can be understood as local decisions to expand/contract muscles between
the beads where the maximum local power input on a bead is constrained
and set by the value of F₀. Second, we assume that the proposed force Φᵢ(tₖ) of
every controller directly targets the actual force applied to its associated
bead, but, to fulfill the force-free condition, we subtract the mean Φ̄(tₖ) =
¹⁄ₙ∑ᵢ₌₁ⁿΦᵢ(tₖ) from every proposed force and arrive at Fₐ(tₖ) = Φᵢ(tₖ) -
Φ̄(tₖ) (see Fig. 2b). Hence the first approach ensures the global force-free
condition via a series of locally annihilating pair-forces motivated by bio-
logical force dipole generation at small scales that cause the arms between
the corresponding beads i and (i + 1) to contract or extend. In turn, the
second approach regularizes the forces by collective feedback (via Φ̄(tₖ)) and
can be interpreted as a mean-field approach that may be utilized by external
controllers for artificial microswimmers⁵³. Henceforth, we refer to the first

[PAGE 4] Article
scenario as type A, and to the second scenario as type B microswimmers,
and alike for the corresponding self-navigation strategies or policies. We
note that for both type A and B microswimmers the total force per bead is
constrained to Fᵢ(tₖ) ∈ [-2F₀, 2F₀], except for the first and last bead of type
A which are only connected to a single muscle such that for type A swim-
mers F₁(tₖ) and Fₙ(tₖ) ∈ [-F₀, F₀].

Following RL terminology, we refer to the mapping between perceptions
and actions of an agent (or here, synonymously, a controller) as its policy,
πᵢ: pᵢ(tₖ) → aᵢ(tₖ). In general, such a policy is a complicated and complex
function of the input, and ANNs as universal function approximators are
well-suited tools to parameterize these objects for arbitrary agents and
environments (see Methods). Thus, we approximate the RL agent's policy πᵢ
by an ANN, formally expressed as a function fθ(·) with parameters θ, such
that aᵢ(tₖ) = fθ(pᵢ(tₖ)). More specifically, we treat a single N-bead swimmer as a
multi-agent system, each bead being equipped with a functionally identical
but operationally independent ANN-based controller, fθ(·). This renders the
system reminiscent of a Neural Cellular Automaton (NCA) with the
extension that the decentralized actions of all individual controllers give rise
to a collective locomotion policy Π = {π₁, ..., πₙ} ≈ {fθ(p₁(tₖ)), ..., fθ(pₙ(tₖ))},
of the entire virtual organism (see also ref. ⁵⁹). Here, only a single set of
parameters θ is used for all N bead-specific agents, i.e., the same ANN
controller is deployed to every bead; the states of the latter only differ in their
initial conditions and subsequent input-output-history. For our purposes, this
renders the optimization problem much more tractable compared to
situations with a single centralized controller, Π ≈ fθ̄(p₁(tₖ), ..., pₙ(tₖ)),
especially for large swimmer morphologies.

Here, we aim at identifying optimal and robust swimming gaits for
arbitrarily large N-bead swimmers, which translates to finding suitable
ANN parameters, θ(opt), such that the bead-specific perception-action cycles,
aᵢ(tₖ) = fθ(opt)(pᵢ(tₖ)), collectively self-propel the multi-agent system effi-
ciently in a certain direction. More specifically, the set of parameters θ
comprises the weights and biases of the agent's ANN-based controller,
which we designed to be numerically feasible for our neuroevolution
approach (see below): In stark contrast to traditional RL agents, with often
more than tens or hundreds of thousands of parameters, we here utilize a
predefined architecture inspired by refs. ⁵⁸,⁶⁵ with only 59 parameters (see
the "Artificial neural network-based decentralized controllers" subsection in
the "Methods"). Thus, we can utilize EAs, specifically a simple genetic
algorithm⁶⁶ discussed in the “Genetic algorithm and neuroevolution of
single-agent policies with collective goals" subsection in the “Methods," to
adapt the ANN parameters (but not the ANN topology⁷³) such that the
entire N-bead swimmer's mean center of mass (COM) velocity,
vₜ = ¹⁄ₙ|∑ᵢ₌₁ⁿ(xᵢ(T) − xᵢ(0))|, is maximized for a predefined swimming
duration T = 400 – 800∆t, where ∆t = 5 μR²/F₀ is the time interval between
two consecutive perception-action cycles of an RL agent. T is chosen suf-
ficiently large to provide the respective N-bead swimmer enough time to
approach a steady swimming state and to execute several swimming strokes,
starting from randomized initial positions. Thus, we define the objective, i.e.,
the fitness score in terms of EAs, or the reward in terms of RL, as the mean
COM velocity v = <vₜ>ₙₑ, averaged over Nₑ = 10 statistically independent
episodes, and search for θ(opt) = maxθ<v> through variation dθ of the
parameters θ via EAs, as detailed in the "Genetic algorithm and neuroe-
volution of single-agent policies with collective goals" subsection in the
"Methods".


[PAGE 4] Individual, bead-specific decisions facilitate collective swim-
ming of an N-bead swimmer

We utilize EAs to optimize the parameters of the ANN-based controllers
(which are deployed to every bead in a specific morphology) for
different realizations of our multi-agent microswimmer models. More
specifically, we deploy morphologies ranging from N = 3 to N = 100 beads of
type A and B microswimmers and train every swimmer of different size N
for both types independently via EAs to self-propel by maximizing their
respective fitness score v. For details on the utilized ANNs and the applied
EA we refer to the "Modeling system-level decision-making with decen-
tralized controllers" subsection in the “Results and Discussion” and to the
"Methods".

The training progress is presented in Fig. 1 exemplarily for type A
microswimmers of different morphologies N, demonstrating that the pro-
posed decentralized decision-making strategy is capable of facilitating fast
system-level swimming gaits for all the considered swimmer sizes up to
N= 100. Thus, our method removes the bottleneck for machine-learning
navigation policies of large-scale microswimmers by employing computa-
tionally manageable local ANN-based perception-action loops of their
bead-specific agents. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time
successful training of microswimmers with such a large number of degrees
of freedom has been achieved.


[PAGE 4] Different strategies of autonomy: large-scale coordination
enables fast swimming

Employing the learned policies of both type A and B microswimmers for
different body sizes, i.e., the number of beads N, we determine the respective
stroke-averaged COM velocities v, which increase monotonously with N as
depicted in Fig. 3a, b. We normalize all velocities here with v₀ = 2F₀/(6πμR),
i.e., the velocity of a bead dragged by an external force of strength 2F₀. Type B
swimmers are significantly faster compared to type A swimmers by almost
one order of magnitude, especially for large N. As illustrated in Fig. 3a, for
type A microswimmers with locally ensured force-free conditions, the mean
COM velocity v saturates with increasing N at vₘₐₓ/v₀ ≈ 0.03 for N = 100.

[PAGE 4] In contrast (c.f., Fig. 3b), the fastest type B microswimmer, again at N = 100,
achieves a maximum COM velocity of vₘₐₓ/v₀ ≈ 0.15.

The insets in Fig. 3a, b illustrate results for the well-studied three-bead
swimmer (N = 3). First, they show the characteristic periodic 1-step-back-2-
step-forward motion of the COM trajectory³³. Second, the corresponding
steady state phase space dynamics of the active forces on beads 1 and 3,
(F₁, F₃), and of the arm lengths (l₁, l₂), reiterating the periodic motion. Note
that the force on bead 2 simply follows from F₂ = -F₁ - F₃. While both
type A and B three-bead swimmers move at comparable speed, this is
achieved with different policies, as can be seen by the different phase space
curves (see also Supplementary Movie 1).

In Fig. 3c, d, we present trajectories of both the COM and bead-specific
coordinates (top panels; respective insets emphasize the COM dynamics),
and of the bead-specific proposed forces (bottom panels) for an (N = 15)-
bead type A- and (N = 100)-bead type B microswimmer, respectively. These
selected trajectories demonstrate the genuinely different swimming strate-
gies for type A and B microswimmers (which have been optimized with the
same EA settings).

In type A microswimmers (Fig. 3c), the pairwise arm forces induce
periodic waves of arm contractions of relatively high frequency but small
wavelength, which travel through and move forward the body of the N-bead
microswimmer. For swimmers with a sufficiently large number of beads N
this leads to a relatively smooth and linear COM motion (see inset in Fig. 3c).

In stark contrast, the fastest swimming strategies for type B micro-
swimmers (Fig. 3d) assumes coordinated arm strokes across large fractions
of their bodies, essentially contracting and extending almost the entire
swimmer simultaneously, which is reflected in the oscillatory COM motion
even for very large N (see inset in Fig. 3d). This large-scale coordination
exceeds the capabilities of the locally interlocked policies of type A micro-
swimmers and strikes us as an emergent phenomenon which-still based
on purely local decision-making-is facilitated by the mean-field motivated
feedback of the mean proposed force of all the agents in the system: type B
microswimmers seemingly act as a single entity⁶⁸, despite the fact that the
precise number of constituents, N, is not important and can vary (see also
Supplementary Movies 2 and 3).

As shown in Fig. 3d, typical emergent swimming gaits of the respective
type B swimmers are reminiscent of the large amplitude contraction-wave
based locomotion of crawling animals such as caterpillars. Similarly, the
crawling locomotion of crawling fly larvae had been optimized using RL
recently⁷¹. In the context of locomotion in viscous fluids, large-amplitude
traveling waves along the body have been discussed as an alternative
swimming strategy of flagella-less organisms⁷²,⁷³.


[PAGE 4] Transferable evolved policies: decentralized decision-making
generalizes to arbitrary morphologies

We have recently shown that biologically inspired NCA-based multi-
agent policies especially when evolved via evolutionary processes-can
display behavior that is highly robust against structural and functional
perturbations and exhibit increased generalizability, adaptability, and
transferability⁵⁸,⁷⁴. We thus investigate here whether our decentralized
locomotion policies, which are genuinely evolved for microswimmer
bodies with exactly Nₜ beads, generalize to morphological changes. More
specifically, we carefully optimize ANN policies for a particular number
of Nₜ = 3 to 100 beads (as discussed above) and deploy them-without
any retraining or further adaptation-into microswimmer bodies with a
different number of N = 3 to 300 beads instead to evaluate the corre-
sponding swimming velocities for such cross-policy environments.

As illustrated in Fig. 4a, b, we find that the vast majority of all
policies that are most optimal for a particular value of Nₜ are also highly
effective in self-propelling microswimmers with N ≠ Nₜ for both type A
and B, respectively. This even holds for situations where Nₜ <<N, such as
Nₜ = 3 and N = 300. We did not explicitly optimize for this property at
all, but it is an emergent phenomenon of the inherent decentralized
decision-making of the system. Thus, the collective nature of the pro-
posed swimming policies renders the evolved locomotive strategies

[PAGE 5] Article

highly adaptive to morphological changes, irrespective of the specific
number of beads N used during deployment. Only for a few situations
which can occur when the number of beads N deviates significantly from
the number of beads Nₜ used during training, do not lead to successful
swimming, in particular for type B microswimmers (Fig. 4b). In those
cases the locally emerging periodic arm motion is lost and the beads are
trapped in a resting state.

Moreover, the set of policies evolved and deployed for
different bead numbers of Nₜ and N, respectively, allows us to estimate a
trend for optimal swimming gaits for large N: In steady state, the arm-
lengths lᵢ(tₖ) of an arbitrary trained Nₜ-bead swimmer describe limit
cycle dynamics in an (N − 1)-dimensional phase space (c.f., Fig. 3).
Then, all arms oscillate at the same angular velocity ω and exhibit the
same cross-correlation times τ to their neighboring arms, where
lᵢ₊₁(tₖ) = lᵢ(tₖ - τ), and we can express each of the i = 1, ..., N arm
lengths as a 2π-periodic function l̂ᵢ(t) = f ((t − iτ)ῶ + φ), with the
phase shift φ defining the initial conditions; for more details about ῶ and

[PAGE 5] we refer to the "Swimming-gait analysis" subsection in the "Methods”.
We can also write lᵢ(t) in the form of a wave equation as
lᵢ(t) = f (tω + 2πi/λ + φ), where the bead index i controls the “spatial”
oscillations at a (dimensionless) wavelength λ = 2π/(ωτ) irrespective of the
corresponding physical bead positions xᵢ(tₖ). A careful analysis of
different naive block-swimmer or waveform policies in the Supple-
mentary Note 1 suggests that the found waveform parametrization
obtained by the RL procedure is close to the optimum within our model
assumptions for sufficiently large microswimmers. In particular, we
find that the best policies for the proposed forces for the faster,
sufficiently large type B microswimmers are well approximated by
Φᵢ(t) = F₀ sign [sin(ῶt – 2πi/λ)]; the swimming speed is close to max-
imum by choosing for ω and λ the respective values obtained from our
RL procedure.

In Fig. 4c, e, g, we respectively present ῶ, τ̄, and λ̄ for the fastest type A
microswimmers as a function of N (blue circles), additionally to the training
conditions where N = Nₜ (magenta "x" symbol). We can see that these

[PAGE 6] Article
quantities are almost independent of N, and we observe only weak
logarithmic dependencies of τ̄ and λ̄ (see Fig. 4 caption). In contrast, for type
B see Fig. 4d, f, h, the angular velocity is approximately inverse to the
swimmer length ω ~ N⁻¹, and the wavelength almost linear to N, λ ~ N
(detailed fits see Fig. 4 caption). As a result, the evaluated τ̄ values for
type B microswimmers (Fig. 4f) are almost constant and the values are

[PAGE 6] comparable to those of the type A microswimmer, but slightly decrease
with N.

[PAGE 6] Large-scale coordination leads to efficient locomotion

In our approach, we limit the maximum forces on each of the beads and,
thus, the maximum bead velocities. This procedure is somewhat similar

[PAGE 7] Article
as fixing the total power consumption of the swimmer. In previous
optimization procedures on 3- and N-bead swimmers commonly the
swimming efficiency is optimized⁷⁵,⁷⁶, where e.g., the power consump-
tion of the entire swimmer is taken into account as a single, global
quantity. In contrast, in our work, we set local constraints on the
swimmer by limiting the forces on every bead. Although we hence did
not optimize in our RL procedure for the hydrodynamic efficiency η of
our swimmers, we measure η determined by refs. ¹,⁷⁵ η = 6πμRₑff v²/P
where P = ∫∑ᵢvᵢ(t)Fᵢ(t)dt is the stroke-averaged power consump-
tion, and Rₑff is the effective radius of our swimmers. There is no unique
way to define Rₑff of our swimmer (see also the discussion in ref. ⁷⁵), and
it is hence not straightforward to compare Rₑff of swimmers of different
size N. We choose here Rₑff = NR, which approximates the combined
drag on all of the spheres, neglecting hydrodynamic interactions. The
power consumption is naturally limited to be P<Pₘₐₓ with
Pₘₐₓ = 2NF₀v₀ = 2NF₀²/(6πμR), for both cases, type A and B; F₀ and v₀
are the force- and velocity-scale in our model, see the "Modeling
system-level decision-making with decentralized controllers” subsection
in the "Results and Discussion". However, type B swimmers can exploit
their higher freedom to adjust the forces on the beads compared to the
arm-force-limited type A swimmer to locomote at higher speed, and
hence at higher efficiency η. As seen in Fig. 5a, b for both type A and B
swimmers, the efficiency increases with swimmer length N and levels off
at large N. The efficiency is relatively low for all swimmer lengths N for
type A swimmers, and is limited to 0.12%. In contrast, long type B
swimmers can reach surprisingly high efficiencies of even ≈ 1.5% for
N = 100, comparable to the efficiency of real existing microswimmers¹.

As discussed above, a larger microswimmer can swim faster due to the
emergence of long-wavelength longitudinal waves. Indeed, it thus is not
surprising that longer type B swimmers are faster than shorter ones. Ani-
mals typically scale their speed with their size⁷⁷. Here we determine the
swimmer speed per size v/N depending on N as shown in Fig. 5c, d, where


[PAGE 7] we identify a maximum for N = 4 for type A and at N = 8 for type B. Hence,
these swimmers need the smallest amount of time to swim their own body
size NL₀ compared to swimmers of different N. For large N, v/N decays with
a power law (see inset Fig. 5c, d).


[PAGE 7] Robust- and failure tolerant locomotion and cargo transport
without re-training

Since our evolved microswimmer policies show strong resilience even
against significant morphological perturbations (see Fig. 4), we aim to
investigate this operational plasticity even further: Exemplarily for the most
optimal type A and B microswimmers with (N = 13), we systematically load
the arms with extra passive "cargo" beads of variable radius R ∈ [0, 2R], and
evaluate the dynamics of the corresponding loaded microswimmer con-
sisting now of N = 13 + 1 beads, without retraining or further optimization.
These cargo beads can geometrically be located between two neigh-
boring beads of the microswimmer, but remain functionally disjoint from
the latter (cargo beads are not connected by arms to any body beads): when
placed at an arm lᵢ, a cargo bead does not disrupt the exchange of infor-
mation between the corresponding beads i and (i + 1) and thus does not
affect the inputs of the respective bead-specific ANNs. Since cargo beads are
passive elements, they do not propose active forces independently,
Fₐ(t) = 0, and are moved around solely by the hydrodynamic interaction
with the other beads and the restoring spring forces of nearby beads. This
ensures that a cargo bead is topologically fixed in the microswimmer's body.

Figures 6a, b demonstrates, that our approach of utilizing decen-
tralized, bead-specific controllers for N-bead microswimmer locomotion
not only gives rise to highly robust self-propulsion policies (see the
"Transferable evolved policies: decentralized decision-making generalizes to
arbitrary morphologies” subsection in the “Results and Discussion”) but can
also be used “out of the box” for cargo transport applications⁷⁸: We show
that both type A and B microswimmers are capable of swimming while
having additional cargo beads of various sizes located at different internal


[PAGE 8] positions, i.e., at different arms along their main axes. While the presence of
cargo beads significantly restrains the neighboring beads from adapting the
adjacent arm length, essentially locking the corresponding arm, the
remaining functional beads self-propel the entire microswimmer effectively.
We further emphasize that, in general, the swimming speed decreases with
increasing cargo size, R𝒸.

Next, we successively fill all arms of a single microswimmer from the
left, l₁, to the right, lₙ, simultaneously with a total number of
N𝒸 = 1, ..., (N − 1) cargo beads of equal radius R𝒸 (one cargo per arm) and
measure the speed of the correspondingly loaded (N+N𝒸)-bead micro-
swimmers as a function of the number of loaded arms and cargo size. Both
type A and B microswimmers are capable of transporting multiple cargo
loads at once efficiently, as illustrated in Fig. 6c, d: they can carry up to
≈50-60% of their active beads N before the respective locomotion cap-
abilities fail due to an increasing number of blocked arms. While we here
fixed N = 13 to demonstrate cargo transport, it can be applied to different
swimmer realizations, i.e., other morphologies and evolved policies: As
shown in the Supplementary Note 2a, microswimmers of different size N
display similarly behavior as shown in Fig. 6 for N = 13, rendering our
system highly robust against such morphological defects.

Another potential morphological malfunction in our model is cor-
rupting the information flow between selected neighboring beads. We thus
choose a number of Nₐ links lᵢ between different neighboring beads i, j =
i+1 (c.f., Fig. 1), and intentionally set the corresponding contributions
from bead j, i's to bead i, j's perception vectors pᵢ(tₖ) and pⱼ(tₖ) to zero before
measuring the corresponding swimming velocities of different swimmer
realizations; this will affect bead i's measurements of the distance lᵢ(tₖ)→0,
velocity vᵢ(tₖ)→0, and state sⱼ(tₖ)→0 of the neighboring bead j, and vice-
versa (see the "Modeling system-level decision-making with decentralized
controllers" subsection in the "Results and Discussion" and the "Methods").
As depicted in Fig. 7, the relative affected swimming velocity for type A
and B microswimmers of size N effectively decreases linearly as a function of
the fraction of blocked links Nₐ/(N − 1). In fact, the microswimmers can
handle even a fraction of ≈50% blocked links while maintaining ≥50% of
their unaffected swimming speed.

Thus, our evolved navigation policies of the proposed micro-
swimmer system not only show strong resilience against partly sig-
nificant morphological changes of the swimmer's body (see also Fig. 4),
but even against functional alterations and failures of single or multiple
actuators (c.f., blocked arms and links in Figs. 6 and 7). Moreover, the
decentralized control paradigm in our microswimmer system is tolerant
against various sources of noise, e.g., in the predicted action outputs, in
the beads' input perceptions, and in the presence of thermal noise added
to the equations of motion, as detailed in the Supplementary Note 2b-d,
respectively. In the former two cases, efficient locomotion is still possible
for noise-to-signal ratios of 50% or even more. In the latter case, we add


[PAGE 9] Article
additive noise with diffusivity D, which allows for locomotion until
Pe⁻¹ = D/D₀ = kBT/(2F₀R) ~0.1 with D₀ = Rv₀, i.e., down to Péclet num-
bers Pe of ~O(10¹), therefore in the range of real microswimmer
systems. We emphasize that this goes well beyond what the swimmers
experienced during training and is a clear sign of generalizability and
robustness via collective decision-making⁷⁹,⁸⁰.


[PAGE 9] Conclusions

Our study demonstrates that machine learning of decentralized decision-
making strategies of the distributed actuators in a composite in silico
microswimmer can lead to highly efficient navigation policies of the entire
organism that are, moreover, highly robust with respect to morphological
changes or defects. More specifically, we treat each of the N beads of a
generalized NG microswimmer model as an ANN-based agent that per-
ceives information about its adjacent beads and whose actions induce
activations of adjacent muscles. Via genetic algorithms, we have optimized
such single-bead decision-making centers to collectively facilitate highly
efficient swimming gaits on the system level of the NG swimmer.

In that way, we have identified locomotion strategies for increasingly
large microswimmer bodies, ranging from N = 3 to N = 100, with hydro-
dynamic efficiencies of up to η ≈ 1.5%, close to that of real biological
microswimmers; to the best of our knowledge, this is the first demonstration
of successfully training an (N = 100)-bead microswimmer.

While having focused here on evolving swimming gaits for NG
microswimmers of fixed morphologies, we report that the optimized
decentralized locomotion policies generalize well without any further
optimization towards partly severe morphological changes: policies
optimized for an Nₜ-bead microswimmer are in most cases also highly
effective for (N ≠ Nₜ)-bead morphologies, even if N≫ Nₜ or vice versa. This
renders our approach robust and modular from both a physiological and
information processing point of view ⁵⁸,⁵⁹, going well beyond more tradi-
tional, in this sense much more brittle RL applications that are typically
concerned with centralized controllers with a fixed number of inputs and
outputs.

The limiting computational factor in our simulations is not the con-
troller part, but the O(N²) complexity of the hydrodynamic model, which
could be leveraged by further modeling, numerical optimization, or hard-
ware accelerators. However, the scalability of our approach allows us to
generalize the optimized policies as a function of N, again overcoming
limitations posed by traditional RL methods, and leveraging analytical
investigations of the generalized NG model to the limit of N→∞.

As we demonstrate, the inherent robustness and increased structural
and functional plasticity of the here investigated microswimmer locomotion

[PAGE 10] Methods
Hydrodynamic interactions and numerical details for the N-bead
swimmer model

The microswimmer consists of N hydrodynamically interacting beads
located at positions xᵢ(tₖ), i = 1,