The Computational Boundary of a
"Self": Developmental Bioelectricity
Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free
Cognition


[PAGE 2] INTRODUCTION: DEEP PROBLEMS
WITH SOMETHING FUNDAMENTAL
IN COMMON

Why did some competent unicellular organisms join together
to form complex bodies, and how do they cooperate during
highly robust embryogenesis and regeneration of anatomical
structures? Why does this process break down during
carcinogenic defection from the body plan? How can we best
understand and control biological systems that consist of
numerous nested levels of organization, such as bacteria and
biofilms, which can functionally interact with the host's cells,
tissues, and organs? How are lower level (molecular and cellular)
activities harnessed toward adaptive system-level outcomes
during regulative development and adaptation to novel stressors?
What is the relationship between the ability of cells to implement
invariant organ-level morphogenetic goal states and the purposive
activity of brains? What dynamics enable the scaling of cognitive
capacities from the simple memory functions found in bacteria
to those of sophisticated minds?

All these fundamental biological problems have one thing
in common: the need to understand and formalize what a
coherent Individual or Agent is, in a way that is compatible
with a gradual co-evolution of minds and bodies (Tarnita et al.,
2013). While significant work has addressed this topic from
an evolutionary perspective, I suggest a different and
complementary view called Scale-Free Cognition, synthesizing
ideas from theories of computation and control to identify
common information-processing events occurring at multiple
levels of organization. I propose a semi-quantitative metric,
based on the spatio-temporal boundaries of events that systems
measure and try to control, that can be used to define and
compare the cognitive boundaries for highly diverse types of
agents (which could be biological, exo-biological, or artificial).
Ideas from the fields of proto-cognition, developmental
biophysics, and information theory offer a novel lens with
which to understand the evolution, development, physiology,
and behavior of a wide range of living systems. Focusing on
information processing and decision-making enables a unifying
conception of goal-directedness in biological systems, which
naturally scales from simple homeostatic pathways to complex
cognition via evolutionarily ancient physiological mechanisms
of cell-cell communication. Here, I illustrate these hypotheses
from the perspective of developmental bioelectricity, which
evolution has robustly exploited for cognitive scaling; however,
the same general scheme applies to any similar mechanism,
whether chemical, physical, or other.

These ideas are explored here from the perspective of the
following three core assumptions. First is a commitment to
evolution: every capacity has a natural history and emerged
from simpler variants. Closely related is the idea that cognition,
like "organism status" (Child, 1915; Queller and Strassmann,
2009), is not a binary capacity that exists in higher organisms
only (Figure 1). Thus, it is fundamentally incorrect to view
functional capacities such as memory, prediction, goal-
directedness, etc. as entirely new features appropriate only to
advanced forms of life, or to view descriptions of cognitive

[PAGE 2] WHAT IS A SELF? DEFINING
"INDIVIDUALS"

"Of course there is no question that a tree or an elephant
is one individual, and we have a very clear mental picture
of what this means, for we ourselves are individuals. But
there are lower forms in the borderland between
one-celled organisms and multicellular organisms that
are more bothersome in this respect."
-J. T. Bonner, 1950

Neuroscientists (and philosophers of mind) have long wrestled
with the question of how many can add up to one – a
"conceptual self that is composed of interacting neural regions”
with centralized agency and planning (Murray et al., 2015).
But this is not just a key question for neurobiology: as will
be seen below, important aspects of biomedicine also hinge
on the ability to identify higher-order control structures composed
of cells or pathways. Epistemology requires a subject (whoever
it is that does or does not know something), and this is critical
not only for human philosophers but also for many animals.
Survival depends on evolving finely tuned agency detectors

[PAGE 3] The question of defining an "organism” has been long
discussed in biology (Huxley, 1852; Loeb, 1916, 1937; Sober,
1991; Maynard Smith and Szathmáry, 1995; West et al., 2015).
Much work has been done on defining compound Individuals,
from perspectives of evolution (the forces which drive long-
term changes in the parts and how they relate), game theory
(competition between and within the parts), thermodynamics
and dissipative systems, systems theory, and even immunology
(Prigogine, 1980; Rosen, 1985; Pradeu and Carosella, 2006;
Strassmann and Queller, 2010; Pradeu, 2012, 2016; Godfrey-
Smith, 2016, 2017). Below, I first present some background
on aspects of flexible decision-making at different levels of
biological organization and then argue for a definition based
on information and goal-directedness (Walker et al., 2016)

[PAGE 4] from a developmental biology perspective. I suggest candidates
for proximate mechanisms that drive major transitions and
provide a plausible evolutionary story of how primitive
homeostasis leads to advanced agency (Man and Damasio,
2019). This perspective is complementary to others, not
incompatible with them. There is likely more than one useful
definition of what constitutes a cognitive agent, in terms of
making predictions and optimizing control policies for the
origin and behavior of specific agents in various circumstances.
As will be seen below, the information-centered definition of
the Self has specific advantages for dealing with nested (multi-
scale) structures observed in the biosphere and for understanding
the shifting (not fixed) boundaries between Self and environment
that can change within the timeline of a single individual (not
only on evolutionary timescales).

[PAGE 4] BODY PATTERNING AND COGNITION:
A COMMON ORIGIN

"Our life is shaped by our mind; we become what
we think."
Gautama Buddha

It is a well-known fact that the biosphere is a set of nesting
dolls (Smythies, 2015). Eco-systems consist of groups that are
comprised of organisms, which in turn are made of organs
composed of tissues, which consist of cells made up of
biochemical networks.

Remarkably, flexible and adaptive behavior is found at every
level, which provides an important background for thinking
about scale-invariant, essential features of Individuals in the
broadest sense. Do integrated Selves only exist at the level of
"organisms" (bodies), or could they arise and co-exist at multiple
levels of organization and be recognized in novel contexts and
implementations? In preparation for a proposed definition of
Selves as goal-directed computational agents regardless of
implementation, it is helpful to begin by considering novel
embodiments of capacities usually associated with brains.

Single cells are composite agents that exhibit extremely rich
patterning and behaviors and can be divided into even smaller
independent units (such as cytoplast fragments with autonomous
activity) because of their dynamic cytoskeletal and protein
network subsystems (Novák and Bentrup, 1972; Albrecht-Buehler,
1985; Ford, 2017; Siccardi and Adamatzky, 2017; Barvitenko
et al., 2018; Graham et al., 2018). These capacities of cells

[PAGE 5] presage their swarm behavior as metazoan organisms (Gregg,
1959). Most features observed in the anatomical control of
complex organisms, including differentiation (Sogabe et al.,
2019), plasticity (Koch et al., 2017), programmed cell death
(Gordeeva et al., 2004), regenerative repair (Morgan, 1901),
and "neural" machinery (Tasneem et al., 2005; Liebeskind et al.,
2011; Burkhardt, 2015) already existed in ancient, unicellular
life forms. Cells such as bacteria and yeast, as well as advanced
plants, have been studied for their ability to compute and
predict future events using patterns inferred from prior

[PAGE 6] MULTICELLULARITY VS. CANCER: THE
SHIFTING BOUNDARY OF THE SELF

The communication that enables cells to join into collectives
that make decisions about the growth and form of organ-level
structures (i.e., what to sculpt and when to stop) can go awry,
resulting in cancer (Chernet and Levin, 2013a; Moore et al.,
2017). Despite highly diverse molecular and clinical
manifestations, one common aspect points to the key: in
carcinogenic transformation (Yamasaki et al., 1995; Ruch and
Trosko, 2001), cells become isolated from the physiological
signals that bind them into unified networks (the essential
role of bioelectricity in this process is discussed in the next
section). In the absence of global cues, they revert to their
unicellular past, when their behaviors were aimed at optimizing
the future of just one cell: proliferate as much as possible,
and travel to whatever location affords the best local environment
for nutrients and expansion (Davies and Lineweaver, 2011;
Bussey et al., 2017; Zhou et al., 2018a). This is a breakdown
of multicellularity and highlights the fact that the scale of the
structure which cells work to maintain can change rapidly –
from cooperation toward an entire organ system or body to
the level of a single cell.

Normal bodies consist of networks of cells working together
toward a unified goal – create and maintain specific large
structures. In an important sense, each cell is integrated, via
physiological signaling, into a coherent swarm intelligence with
system-level (anatomical) goals. In cancer, the scope of the
coherent Self of a cell reduces from being as large as the
boundary of a whole body, to that of just one cell's surface.
The scope of the Self – the structure which a cell works to

[PAGE 7] DEFINING INDIVIDUATION FROM A
COGNITIVE PERSPECTIVE

"By the term "mind,” I mean ideas and purposes."
-McCulloch, 1951

I propose a definition of an Individual based on its
information-processing structure (Barandiaran et al., 2009): the
scale and types of goals that a system can pursue defines
(determines) the boundaries and content of the putative “agent.”
On this view, what defines a coherent, unified Self out of its
constituent components and the surrounding environment is
the set of parts that operate toward reaching specific goal

[PAGE 8] THE AGENT'S EVOLUTIONARY BACK-
STORY: SCALING OF INFORMATION BY
BIOELECTRICITY

What evolutionary pressures lead cognitive boundaries to expand,
resulting in the variety of agents observed in the biosphere? A
sequence of phases can be hypothesized (setting aside the abiotic
origin of chemical systems with feedback). I propose that the
"atom" of this cognitive hierarchy is homeostasis (Bernard, 1865;
Cannon, 1932; Wiener, 1961; Man and Damasio, 2019). The
ancient origin of living forms is predicated on the ability of some
simple systems to achieve coherence and distinction from the
external environment, against perturbations, maintaining spatial
and metabolic integrity by ensuring certain parameters stay in
specific ranges (Maturana and Varela, 1980; Luisi, 2014). This
homeostatic persistence is the origin of cognitive goals – the
setpoints of subcellular biochemical circuits that react to
perturbations in a way that maintains parameter range are the
first, tiny examples of integrated goal-seeking systems. Homeostatic
setpoints (actually, ensembles and not single points) are encoded
by biophysical properties that guide activity toward implementing
those states. The ability to operate toward a region in state space

[PAGE 13] CONCLUSION AND FUTURE OUTLOOK

"The self is not something ready-made, but something in
continuous formation through choice of action."
-John Dewey

A number of ideas from cognitive neuroscience, information
theory, computer science, cybernetics, and engineering converge
on key questions in biology with respect to the multi-scale
interface between body structure and mind. The scheme described
above seeks to (1) define Individuals and Selves in a way that
facilitates taxonomy, comparison, and communication with
evolved, created, biological, artificial, and exo-biological agents,
and (2) propose a plausible naturalistic framework for the
evolutionary scale-up of cognition from earliest origins of life,
hypothesizing about the forces that drove it and the major
transitions along the continuum. The goal of this research
program is to show how complex agency and goal-directedness
evolves naturally from ancient mechanisms. The evolutionary
pressure to survive in a challenging world leads (in order)
from simple homeostasis to infotaxis, memory, anticipation,
spatio-temporal scale-up of measurement and prediction, and
large-scale global goals (system-level agency). The implications
of these hypotheses extend beyond philosophy and evolutionary
biology. Practical strategies for regenerative medicine (control
of cell collectives in vivo toward macrostates such as "healthy
structure and function"), exobiology, and robotics/AI are impacted
by our view of what defines a coherent Self.

[PAGE 18] WHAT DOES IT FEEL LIKE TO
BE A PANCREAS?

Most of the prior discussion focused on objective, functional
traits, and capabilities and is compatible with several views
on consciousness. Nothing in this model explains why specific
functional features give rise to first-person experience (the
so-called Hard Problem). But, given that at least some nervous
systems do give rise to such experience and that the differences
between neural networks and non-neural ones (aside from
temporal scale) are minimal, it is natural to hypothesize that
there is something-it-is-like to being a tissue or organ and
making decisions. It is not claimed of course that a pancreas,
in its striving to keep homeostasis, has any self-awareness in
the human sense, but it may have as much proto-consciousness
as a simple neural network and indeed diabetes has already
been modeled as a kind of cognitive disorder (Arntfield and
van der Kooy, 2011; Goel and Mehta, 2013). The model does
take a stand on the perennial “combination problem" and can
perhaps be seen as a form of panpsychism (Chalmers, 2013).

One final comment concerns an interesting intersection
of the above model with non-Western views on consciousness.
It is striking that the process which Zen practice is meant
to reverse – attachment to past memories and high valence
for future expectations/fears – is precisely the process suggested
to be responsible for the creation of complex Selves. It is
unclear whether it is beneficial (or even possible) to truly
live in the moment and let go of past memories and future
expectations, but anyone who succeeded in doing this would
achieve precisely what Zen promises: the dissolution of the
self (Flanagan, 2011; Josipovic, 2014, 2019). According to
the above model, the Zen ideas of stamping out desire (goal-
directed activity, preferences for specific states of affairs) are
exactly correct in that this would lead to a dissolution of
the ego (Self) and the freedom from the law of cause and
effect that governs the Individual's actions. By turning off
memory, anticipation, and striving, the essential glue that
creates a cognitive Self is dissolved. By erasing the set point

[PAGE 18] AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

The author confirms being the sole contributor of this work
and has approved it for publication.

[PAGE 18] FUNDING

ML gratefully acknowledges support via an Allen Discovery Center
award from The Paul G. Allen Frontiers Group (12171) and via
the Templeton World Charity Foundation (TWCF0089/AB55).


[PAGE 18] ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This work is dedicated to the memory of Werner Loewenstein,
a pioneer of the importance of gap junctions in the physiology
of body and mind. I thank Benjamin Levin, willo Levin, Daniel
C. Dennett, Erik Hoel, Rafael Yuste, David Haig, Stephan
Koehler, the members of the Levin lab, and many people in
the basal cognition community for many useful discussions.
For helpful comments on an early version of this manuscript,
I am grateful to Santosh Manicka, Richard Gawne, Joshua
Finkelstein, Nima Dehghani, Joshua Bongard, and Christopher
Fields (who suggested the term "Scale-Free Cognition").