The Computational Boundary of a “Self”: Developmental Bioelectricity Drives Multicellularity and Scale-Free Cognition

INTRODUCTION: DEEP PROBLEMS WITH SOMETHING FUNDAMENTAL IN COMMON

Why did some competent unicellular organisms join together to form complex bodies, and how do they cooperate during highly robust embryogenesis and regeneration of anatomical structures? Why does this process break down during carcinogenic defection from the body plan? How can we best understand and control biological systems that consist of numerous nested levels of organization, such as bacteria and biofilms, which can functionally interact with the host’s cells, tissues, and organs? How are lower level (molecular and cellular) activities harnessed toward adaptive system-level outcomes during regulative development and adaptation to novel stressors? What is the relationship between the ability of cells to implement invariant organ-level morphogenetic goal states and the purposive activity of brains? What dynamics enable the scaling of cognitive capacities from the simple memory functions found in bacteria to those of sophisticated minds?

All these fundamental biological problems have one thing in common: the need to understand and formalize what a coherent Individual or Agent is, in a way that is compatible with a gradual co-evolution of minds and bodies. While significant work has addressed this topic from an evolutionary perspective, I suggest a different and complementary view called Scale-Free Cognition, synthesizing ideas from theories of computation and control to identify common information-processing events occurring at multiple levels of organization. I propose a semi-quantitative metric, based on the spatio-temporal boundaries of events that systems measure and try to control, that can be used to define and compare the cognitive boundaries for highly diverse types of agents (which could be biological, exo-biological, or artificial). Ideas from the fields of proto-cognition, developmental biophysics, and information theory offer a novel lens with which to understand the evolution, development, physiology, and behavior of a wide range of living systems. Focusing on information processing and decision-making enables a unifying conception of goal-directedness in biological systems, which naturally scales from simple homeostatic pathways to complex cognition via evolutionarily ancient physiological mechanisms of cell-cell communication. Here, I illustrate these hypotheses from the perspective of developmental bioelectricity, which evolution has robustly exploited for cognitive scaling; however, the same general scheme applies to any similar mechanism, whether chemical, physical, or other.

These ideas are explored here from the perspective of the following three core assumptions. First is a commitment to evolution: every capacity has a natural history and emerged from simpler variants. Closely related is the idea that cognition, like “organism status,” is not a binary capacity that exists in higher organisms only (Figure 1). Thus, it is fundamentally incorrect to view functional capacities such as memory, prediction, goal directedness, etc. as entirely new features appropriate only to advanced forms of life, or to view descriptions of cognitive capacities in primitive or aneural organisms as category mistakes. Indeed, failure to appreciate cognitive processes in a system that would have otherwise improved prediction and control is a “neganthropomorphic fallacy” – a type 1 error that is as bad for empirical research as is profligate anthropomorphic reasoning. This is a kind of “intentional stance” approach, generalized beyond brains and behavior. Thus, here it is assumed that there is no such thing as magical “true cognition” that is the province of humans, without a smooth history of precursor capacities in simpler forms, stretching back to the base of the tree of life. Second, it is assumed that all metaphors are to be judged by their utility in driving scientific progress and that there is not a binary categorization of scientific pictures which should be taken literally or not, which can be decided a priori. Thus, whether a way of thinking about a system is correct or mere metonymy is to be determined by whether the specific metaphor gives rise to new, robust research programs – it is an empirical question to be answered in time, based on whether a given metaphor improves prediction and control in novel cases at the bench, compared to other existing metaphors. Third, much of the discussion centers around “goals”, related to teleology, a hotly debated topic: here goal-directedness is taken in the non-magical, cybernetic, engineering, and control theory sense, of a feedback system that operates to maximize some specific state of affairs (which can be modeled as a dynamical system with attractors in its state space). Finally, except for a few brief remarks at the end, no claims about consciousness (first person experience or a sense of self as qualia) are made: all of the examples concern functional, third-person, objective capacities, computations, and behaviors.


WHAT IS A SELF? DEFINING “INDIVIDUALS”

“Of course there is no question that a tree or an elephant is one individual, and we have a very clear mental picture of what this means, for we ourselves are individuals. But there are lower forms in the borderland between one-celled organisms and multicellular organisms that are more bothersome in this respect.”

–J. T. Bonner, 1950

Neuroscientists (and philosophers of mind) have long wrestled with the question of how many can add up to one – a “conceptual self that is composed of interacting neural regions” with centralized agency and planning. But this is not just a key question for neurobiology: as will be seen below, important aspects of biomedicine also hinge on the ability to identify higher-order control structures composed of cells or pathways. Epistemology requires a subject (whoever it is that does or does not know something), and this is critical not only for human philosophers but also for many animals. Survival depends on evolving finely tuned agency detectors that allow them to parse their world into agents that pursue recognizable goals and can be interacted with in a way different than with their parts.

Exobiologists may at some point be confronted with the task of understanding what aspect of an alien ecosystem constitutes some sort of coherent biological Individual. This is likely to be a very non-trivial task, as even life on Earth presents a significant challenge in the cases of metazoan microbiomes and colonial/symbiotic organisms. In addition to evolved/natural Agents, the field of artificial intelligence has (or soon will) give rise to numerous constructs that may represent kinds of Selves. The goal then is not to attempt to draw a sharp line but to understand the factors that go into empirically useful ways to demarcate Individuals in a given context.

The question of defining an "organism” has been long discussed in biology. Much work has been done on defining compound Individuals, from perspectives of evolution (the forces which drive long-term changes in the parts and how they relate), game theory (competition between and within the parts), thermodynamics and dissipative systems, systems theory, and even immunology. Below, I first present some background on aspects of flexible decision-making at different levels of biological organization and then argue for a definition based on information and goal-directedness from a developmental biology perspective. I suggest candidates for proximate mechanisms that drive major transitions and provide a plausible evolutionary story of how primitive homeostasis leads to advanced agency. This perspective is complementary to others, not incompatible with them. There is likely more than one useful definition of what constitutes a cognitive agent, in terms of making predictions and optimizing control policies for the origin and behavior of specific agents in various circumstances. As will be seen below, the information-centered definition of the Self has specific advantages for dealing with nested (multi-scale) structures observed in the biosphere and for understanding the shifting (not fixed) boundaries between Self and environment that can change within the timeline of a single individual (not only on evolutionary timescales).

BODY PATTERNING AND COGNITION: A COMMON ORIGIN

"Our life is shaped by our mind; we become what we think."

Gautama Buddha

It is a well-known fact that the biosphere is a set of nesting dolls. Eco-systems consist of groups that are comprised of organisms, which in turn are made of organs composed of tissues, which consist of cells made up of biochemical networks.
Remarkably, flexible and adaptive behavior is found at every level, which provides an important background for thinking about scale-invariant, essential features of Individuals in the broadest sense. Do integrated Selves only exist at the level of "organisms" (bodies), or could they arise and co-exist at multiple levels of organization and be recognized in novel contexts and implementations? In preparation for a proposed definition of Selves as goal-directed computational agents regardless of implementation, it is helpful to begin by considering novel embodiments of capacities usually associated with brains.

Single cells are composite agents that exhibit extremely rich patterning and behaviors and can be divided into even smaller independent units (such as cytoplast fragments with autonomous activity) because of their dynamic cytoskeletal and protein network subsystems. These capacities of cells presage their swarm behavior as metazoan organisms. Most features observed in the anatomical control of complex organisms, including differentiation, plasticity, programmed cell death, regenerative repair, and "neural" machinery already existed in ancient, unicellular life forms. Cells such as bacteria and yeast, as well as advanced plants, have been studied for their ability to compute and predict future events using patterns inferred from prior experiences. Such aneural systems have also been used to understand neural function. Thus, capacities usually assigned to Individuals with nervous systems, such as integrating spatio-temporal information, memory, and ability to pursue specific outcomes via selection from a number of possible behaviors evolved from far older pre-neural origins.

The emerging field known as “basal cognition" tracks the evolutionary history of learning and decision-making processes, beginning from the dynamic problem-solving capacities of cellular and subcellular forms. Many examples of memory, anticipation, context-dependent decision-making, and learning are exhibited by organisms from yeast and bacteria to plants and somatic cells [reviewed in ]. This is even true of subcellular-level components, e.g., gene-regulatory networks can execute similar learning and computational properties as neural networks, as can cytoskeletal networks, cell signaling pathways, reaction-diffusion chemistry, and metabolic networks. Single cells are very good at managing their morphology, behavior, and physiology as needed for survival, altering their motility, and metabolism in response to, and proactively in, changing environmental conditions. They succeed in exploiting their microenvironment toward optimal reproduction by selecting among numerous possible choices of gene expression patterns and behaviors. While the mechanisms by which unicellular organisms' ability to accomplish specific adaptive ends is harnessed toward cooperative multicellularity is still poorly understood, one thing is clear: somatic cells did not lose their behavioral plasticity and computational capabilities in becoming part of metazoan swarms (bodies): they scaled them to enable pursuit of larger goals consisting of creation and upkeep of massively complex anatomies.

Metazoan embryos are possible because the progeny of a fertilized egg cell can cooperate to create an invariant, large, complex anatomical structure with very high fidelity. Crucially, this is not simply an emergent result of hardwired processes but a very plastic, context-dependent system that achieves invariant patterning outcomes in an uncertain world. Regulative development (e.g., the two normal bodies resulting when an early embryo is cut in half) reveals that cellular swarms are able to achieve the same desired end-state (a species-specific target morphology) despite drastic perturbations and highly unexpected starting states. For example, when tadpoles are perturbed in the laboratory such that their craniofacial organs are in abnormal positions, they still make largely normal frog faces because eyes, jaws, and other structures move around in unnatural paths and only stop when a "correct frog face configuration" is reached. Similarly, salamander tails grafted to the flank slowly remodel into limbs a structure more compatible with the large-scale anatomical spec of a salamander. Many animals, such as axolotls, are able to regenerate whole limbs, no matter where they are amputated, and other organs; a key aspect is that the new appendages grow until the precisely correct structures are made and no less. Developing kidneys will form tubules of the same diameter, whether by cell-cell communication of ~10 cells per cross-section in normal settings or by cytoskeletal bending of single cells around themselves when cell size is artificially increased drastically, revealing the ability of the system to harness diverse molecular mechanisms toward the same anatomical outcome. These are but a few of the ubiquitous examples of remodeling toward an invariant end. They reveal the ability of somatic cells to not only pursue specific target morphologies despite perturbations and novel scenarios, but to pursue collective patterning outcomes that are truly enormous with respect to the scale of size and organization of single cells: the length of a limb or the configuration of a face are simply not defined at the level of single cells - the set points of pattern-homeostatic mechanisms implemented by a cellular collective are large, organ-level macrostates.

Also important to the understanding of compound biological individuals is the ability of cells to make decisions as a single coherent unit. For example, in early embryos, regions on the left and right sides of the midline need to express left- or right-specific genes in order to establish invariant laterality of the heart and visceral organs. Experimental interference with a number of physiological mechanisms upstream of asymmetric gene expression is sufficient to randomize this normally invariant pattern, producing duplicated (LL or RR) or reversed (RL) patterns. Remarkably, however, this randomization is made on a group level in each case, the entire domain randomly picks L or R identity, not exhibiting a speckled appearance where each cell adopts a stochastic outcome. The decision is random, but all of the cells in the domain are coordinated to make the same random decision. This is likewise seen in the conversion of normal frog pigment cells to melanoma - the decision to convert is stochastic across a population of animals, but it is made by all of the melanocytes within a body acting as a single coherent deciding unit. The ability of cells to join into domains that execute group decisions, whether deterministic or stochastic, is an essential component of the evolution of complex forms and will be a central component of a proposed definition of a Self.

The empirical utility of pursuing metaphors based on the parallels between adaptive whole organism behavior and the plasticity of cellular activity during construction and repair of a body is discussed in detail elsewhere. However, for the proposed view of agency described below, and for thinking about its evolutionary origin, it is important to realize that the parallels between goal-directed behaviors and morphogenesis are not only functional but reflect deep conservation of molecular mechanisms. Neural networks control the movement of a body in three-dimensional space; this scheme may be an evolutionary exaptation and speed-optimization of a more ancient, slower role of bioelectrical signaling: the movement of body configuration through anatomical morphospace during embryogenesis, repair, and remodeling. This is an expansion of previous proposals of minimal cognition as sensorimotor coordination, to include cell behavior during morphogenesis as a kind of sensorimotor activity of a patterning Agent.

Developmental bioelectricity is the ubiquitous exchange of slowly changing ion-based voltage signals within and among cells. All cells are electrically active, and modern neurons evolved from pre-neural precursors that were already reaping the benefits of ionic signaling for computation. How ancient are these mechanisms how early was bioelectric coordination exploited by evolution? Bioelectric dynamics, already used for coordination within bacterial biofilms, also enable embryonic tissues to implement robust growth and morphogenesis, as well as by unicellular organisms to coordinate behavior. Recent advances in developmental bioelectricity have shown how endogenous dynamics of resting potential changes modify transcriptional cascades and thereby instruct axial patterning, organ determination, and size control, as well as guiding the behavior of individual cells. It is thus not surprising that drugs that modify traditional cognitive capacities can be strong teratogens, while anesthetics reduce and modify regenerative capacity. We have previously argued that the deep evolutionary conservation of ion channel and neurotransmitter mechanisms highlights a fundamental isomorphism between developmental and behavioral processes. Consistent with this, membrane excitability has been suggested to be the ancestral basis for psychology. Thus, it is likely that the cognitive capacities of advanced brains lie on a continuum with, and evolve from, much simpler computational processes that are widely conserved at both the functional and mechanism (molecular) levels. The information processing and spatio-temporal integration needed to construct and regenerate complex bodies arises from the capabilities of single cells, which evolution exapted and scaled up as behavioral repertoires of complex nervous systems that underlie familiar examples of Selves. An appreciation of these aspects of developmental biology blurs the distinction between mind and body a direction already being explored in the field of soft body robotics, which expands the possibilities for defining new kinds of Selves. A computational perspective on the task of building specific complex anatomies suggests interesting new ways to think about how an integrated Self can be formed and how its boundaries are maintained or altered during its lifetime and within evolutionary timescales.


MULTICELLULARITY VS. CANCER: THE SHIFTING BOUNDARY OF THE SELF


The communication that enables cells to join into collectives that make decisions about the growth and form of organ-level structures (i.e., what to sculpt and when to stop) can go awry, resulting in cancer. Despite highly diverse molecular and clinical manifestations, one common aspect points to the key: in carcinogenic transformation, cells become isolated from the physiological signals that bind them into unified networks (the essential role of bioelectricity in this process is discussed in the next section). In the absence of global cues, they revert to their unicellular past, when their behaviors were aimed at optimizing the future of just one cell: proliferate as much as possible, and travel to whatever location affords the best local environment for nutrients and expansion. This is a breakdown of multicellularity and highlights the fact that the scale of the structure which cells work to maintain can change rapidly - from cooperation toward an entire organ system or body to the level of a single cell.

Normal bodies consist of networks of cells working together toward a unified goal create and maintain specific large structures. In an important sense, each cell is integrated, via physiological signaling, into a coherent swarm intelligence with system-level (anatomical) goals. In cancer, the scope of the coherent Self of a cell reduces from being as large as the boundary of a whole body, to that of just one cell's surface. The scope of the Self – the structure which a cell works to maintain and support - shrinks drastically in two main ways. First, it shrinks spatially: being electrically isolated from their neighbors by a shutdown of gap junction synapses, a cell can neither measure distant events nor communicate across anatomical distances with other cells and with the outside world. All of the attention (in terms of measurement and activity toward scaled goals) is focused at the single cell level, while the rest of the body is treated as the “external environment” (and all living things exploit their environment for their own benefit). Thus, the boundary between self and non-self can shift: multicellularity enlarges it, while carcinogenesis reduces it, and it is readily seen how this shifts the behavior of cells toward a mode that is not beneficial for the organism level. Moreover, the size of the Self shrinks temporally: the time horizon of activity shifts from decades (somatic cells execute regenerative and repair processes that maintain a body up to ~100 years) to a much shorter time frame, as cancer cells undertake activity which may kill the host (and themselves) within a mere year. Normal cells pursue goals (organ maintenance) that can be much longer than a cell's individual lifespan, especially in tissues with rapid cellular turnover the time scale for such homeostatic activity is one that belongs to the collective, not the cells themselves. Shrinking their Self reduces the ability to work toward temporally distant goals (reduces their temporal horizon of concern) and, together with the inability to communicate as part of a distributed electrical network, makes them literally short-sighted - undertaking activity that will result in death of themselves as well as of the organism (except in the very rare cases of transmissible tumors). This view predicts that interference with (or restoration of) physiological communication among cells should be able to trigger (or suppress) cancer and that the relevant parameter (communication) is spread out over considerable distance and not confined to single cells (e.g., genomic damage). The general fact that actively patterning (embryonic and regenerative) environments can reprogram cancer cells to normal histogenesis has been known for decades. However, the specific prediction of a role of real-time bioelectric communication in cancer has been confirmed in vivo in recent experiments: metastatic transformation of normal melanocytes can be achieved in genetically normal tadpoles simply by depolarizing a specific cell population, while, conversely, human oncogenes which normally induce tumors can be prevented from doing so simply by optogenetic or constitutive hyperpolarization.

One important aspect should be stressed, in connection with the classic evolutionary concept of "selfishness": on the above-mentioned view, the cells in a metazoan organism body are not less selfish than unicellular organisms or cancer cells. They are equally selfish, working only for the benefit of themselves, but the relevant self that they defend is bigger in terms of space, time, and complexity. As will be argued below, what defines this Self is the boundary of information being able to pass between the subunits. It should be noted that this change is not binary and can occur at intermediate levels, e.g., teratoma tumors have coherent differentiated tissues (teeth, hair, skin, and muscle) but are not functional embryos, illustrating a level of integrated organization between that of cells and whole organs. It is an essential aspect of Scale-Free Cognition that most biological systems consist of multiple, nested selves [not one, as implied by Integrated Information Theory]. Each inner agent maintains its own local Self only to the extent that it regulates (restricts) information flow from neighbors and thus establishes unique states that do not coincide with those of the collective. Evolutionary and game-like dynamics occur within and between each level of organization, via cooperation and competition. While competition between cells in a body is only now beginning to be characterized in molecular detail, the remarkable fact that different substructures in an otherwise unified organism do not all have the same goals and can work at cross-purposes was realized already at the very dawn of developmental biology by Roux, who presciently wrote of the struggle of the parts in an embryo.

Some biologists model cancer cells as individuals, while some see a tumor as its own organ, which can take over other cell types in the same way that embryonic instructor cells control others in normal development. These possibilities could now be distinguished experimentally and analytically using advances in information theory that enable rigorous comparison of the causal power of models at different levels of description. Identifying the most efficacious level of organization in a given system is critical for selecting targets in biomedical or engineering approaches to understand and control it. Is the best strategy chemotherapy, which seeks to identify and destroy irrevocably broken cells, or could there be normalization strategies that re-connect cells into a collective? The latter is a tantalizing possibility, as it has long been known that embryonic or regenerative environments can reprogram tumors in situ. Motivating a system with inputs and experiences at the appropriate level is always easier than attempting to rewire complex systems with emergent dynamics in attempts to micromanage specific global outcomes. Understanding the decision-making, not only the molecular mechanisms, is essential and is perhaps one path toward resolving the unsatisfactory state of cancer medicine. Similar approaches are being taken with respect to swarms of insects, robots, and human beings. The ability of subunits to enter into a communication network with variable scale of boundaries is already being recognized in swarm dynamics, where the termite nest "superorganism is marked by a kind of extended physiology", which supports regenerative repair (taking the large termite nest as the "body"), a kind of swarm cancer, and primitive cognition functions such as hypothesis testing carried out by the swarm during the repair process. As will be seen in the next section, this continuum between somatic pattern and cognitive systems reflects a deep scale invariance of cognitive concepts that apply as much to societies of cells as of societies of animals. The view of the extent of active information as central to demarcating what exactly constitutes an Individual Self in a given context, especially the focus on a set of level-specific goal states that a system is able to pursue, suggests a formalism for identifying, categorizing, and comparing highly diverse types of Individuals.

DEFINING INDIVIDUATION FROM A COGNITIVE PERSPECTIVE

"By the term "mind,” I mean ideas and purposes."

-McCulloch, 1951

I propose a definition of an Individual based on its information-processing structure: the scale and types of goals that a system can pursue defines (determines) the boundaries and content of the putative “agent.” On this view, what defines a coherent, unified Self out of its constituent components and the surrounding environment is the set of parts that operate toward reaching specific goal states. Like a theorem, which has a holistic nature not shared by any of the axioms alone, a functional individual is more than the sum of its parts in the sense that goal-directed capacity emerges only from the integrated activity of all of the components. This flows naturally from the conception of a goal-seeking system: having specified goal state(s), it is immediately clear than there must be an integrated system that can perform all of the parts of the Test-Operate-Test cycle, which may be invisible by inspecting each of the components in micro detail. This definition is orthogonal to other definitions, e.g., evolutionary or genetic ones, but having bigger goals (such as organ morphogenesis instead of single-cell proliferation) de-Darwinises cells and Darwinises groups, shifting the locus of selection and competition. I propose a working definition for the degree to which a system is a coherent Self, in terms of the goals (in the cybernetic sense) that the system seeks to achieve. Thus, a system's ability to operate toward specific counterfactuals (future states that are not true right now but can be brought about through specific actions) is central to defining, understanding, and communicating with an arbitrary Individual, which might consist of many levels of organized components. Complex cognitive systems can have very large and multifaceted goals, and this arises through evolutionary and ontogenetic scale-up and elaboration of primitive goals that arose from constraints of thermodynamics and homeostasis. The initial, most primitive feature of a living system is preferences – the fact that some states of the world are better for its welfare than others. This enables learning from positive and negative reinforcement, which leads to an explosion of computational and behavioral capabilities. Preferences evolve into goals to the extent that a system grows in complexity and causal power and becomes able to act in the world in ways that are likely to move it toward preferred regions of its state space (initially, focused on simple metabolic survival, but ranging all the way to complex human psychological needs and perhaps beyond). It is likely that any life we observe today (which has passed the filter of selection) has preferences and is good at optimizing for them (making this criterion a useful part of the very definition of life), but it is possible that our initial efforts at artificial life may construct some truly primitive, transitional cases that can maintain a degree of coherence in a sheltered laboratory environment without an efficient goal-seeking capacity.

A very simple organism can only have preferences about what is occurring at the current time, in its immediate environment. A more complex organism whose causal structure enables associative learning can pursue or avoid stimuli that are several steps removed in space, time, and causal connection from whatever it is choosing among. This kind of learning enables associations between stimuli that impinge on very different sensors in different parts of the organism and leads to behavioral preferences about stimuli that are in themselves neutral (do not cause damage or provide immediate reward) but are linked to future positive and negative outcomes by past experience (indirect causal connections stretching across body distance and life history). Others have already made the link between associative learning and the emergence of self. Very complex selves can have preferences about abstract states that are very far away indeed (such as human beings who are genuinely troubled by the ultimate fate of our star and are actively working toward long-distance space travel and the fate of humanity as a whole). However, the spectrum of Selves is not a simple linear one because of the very wide range of possible natural and artificial agents we do (and will increasingly) encounter. The biological world offers numerous corner cases of swarm individuals, but a good conceptual framework will also include organic artificial life, engineered (computer-based) artificial intelligences, and potential exobiological discoveries. Can highly diverse Selves, with very different material structures be compared with each other in any meaningful way? I suggest that a universal rubric, applicable regardless of the physical implementation, can be defined by focusing on the information processing and goal-directed activity of any given system.

The cognitive boundary of an Individual [a “Center of Concern” ] is the most distant (in time and space) set of events that this system can measure and attempts to regulate in its goal-directed activity. It is a surface indicating what things this system can possibly care about (conversely, it defines preferences as the spatio-temporal domain of states that serve as inputs and outputs to the system). In advanced agents, it is also the boundary of the self-model. A range of such systems is illustrated in Figure 2: using one axis for time and one axis to represent three dimensions of space enables a semi-quantitative representation within which individuals of very variable cognitive capacity can be plotted in the same virtual space. Recent work in artificial life has already begun to characterize the cognitive domains of very diverse kinds of complex systems. The edges of a given Agent’s goal space define a sort of “computational light cone” – the boundaries beyond which its cognitive system cannot operate. For example, a tick has a relatively small cognitive boundary, having very little memory or predictive power in the temporal direction, and sensing/acting very locally. A dog has much more temporal memory, some forward prediction ability, and a degree of spatial concern. However, it is likely impossible for a dog’s cognitive apparatus to operate with notions about what is going to happen next month or in the adjacent town. Human minds can operate over goals of vastly greater spatial and temporal scales, and one can readily imagine artificial (organic or software-based) Selves with properties that define every possible shape in this space (and perhaps change their boundaries over evolutionary and individual timescales). As will be seen in the next section, expanding the horizon is what enables information (in the Shannon sense) to acquire meaning, because data become causally linked to distant and past experiences, and acquires implications for future expectations. The formalism also suggests semi-quantitative definitions of maximum cognitive rate (the speed at which information propagates across an agent’s body); this and other similarities to the space-time diagrams of Relativity remain to be explored.

Clearly, much more work is needed to fully flesh out this rubric in a way that makes it immediately applicable in ethology, AI, and artificial life. One implication of this view is that there is not necessarily one unique primary level of organization; rather, Individuals existing at different levels in a given system can be putatively revealed by experiment and analysis that identifies allostatic set points – the goals of systems defined at different levels of organization and the spatio-temporal boundaries of measurements and actions taken by such mechanisms at each level. It is of course non-trivial empirical work to ascertain goals, especially for novel or alien ones. Moreover, systems and subsystems will have different, overlapping, and not always aligned goals. Thus, another key implication is that systems house multiple levels of coexisting coherent Selves. Presumably, the volume of possible cognitive light cones keeps expanding with evolutionary time (although some lineages can contract it, permanently or during specific ontogenetic life stages). Over evolutionary scales, there have been “inflationary leaps” – innovations in body structure which drastically increase the cognitive boundary of viable selves. The formalism places no upper bound on the size of the cognitive light cone. Thus, while we understand “diminished capacity” for human beings in a legal and psychological setting, it is important to also consider “increased capacity”: what would a being with a much larger cognitive boundary than a typical Homo sapiens be like? It is interesting to consider whether this is the sort of outcome envisaged in classical traditions that posited evolution of human consciousness to a state of “Buddha hood” – a cognitive boundary so large that such an individual would be capable of, for example, being directly concerned about the individual welfare of a myriad of beings. It is likely that efforts in artificial life, biomedical enhancement, or engineered AI will eventually give rise to much larger Selves, since it is unlikely that today’s human cognitive sphere is the maximum possible one. Next, we consider a possible sequence of evolutionary scenario for the expansion of cognitive boundaries.


THE AGENT’S EVOLUTIONARY BACK STORY: SCALING OF INFORMATION BY BIOELECTRICITY


What evolutionary pressures lead cognitive boundaries to expand, resulting in the variety of agents observed in the biosphere? A sequence of phases can be hypothesized (setting aside the abiotic origin of chemical systems with feedback). I propose that the “atom” of this cognitive hierarchy is homeostasis. The ancient origin of living forms is predicated on the ability of some simple systems to achieve coherence and distinction from the external environment, against perturbations, maintaining spatial and metabolic integrity by ensuring certain parameters stay in specific ranges. This homeostatic persistence is the origin of cognitive goals – the setpoints of subcellular biochemical circuits that react to perturbations in a way that maintains parameter range are the first, tiny examples of integrated goal-seeking systems. Homeostatic setpoints (actually, ensembles and not single points) are encoded by biophysical properties that guide activity toward implementing those states. The ability to operate toward a region in state space may be the primitive origin of complex cognitive systems that can entertain counterfactuals (remember or anticipate events that are not occurring right now).

Minimization of anti-homeostatic stress is a powerful driver, already suggested to be an important factor in evolutionary innovation. A second step to the simplest homeostatic loop is the inclusion of a richer set of "hidden layers" (in the neural network sense) - additional biochemical nodes between the sensors and effectors of a given system that enable a degree of memory. By introducing a delay between inputs and outputs and by including additional feedback loops that can maintain state after transient stimuli, a much more powerful homeostatic circuit is created, which uses memory of past events to anticipate, not merely react to, environmental challenges. The molecular basis of such anticipatory circuits, and biochemical machinery that responds to different frequencies in signals, has been described in single cells, such as ERK signaling dynamics and metabolic networks. Chemotaxis, such as seen in bacteria, is an early example of this because it exploits time delays in environmental sensing as a kind of memory to enable prediction/anticipation that enables it to optimize travel up nutrient gradients. The earliest forms of such memory are direct and not representational, e.g., slime molds learn to cross salt bridges to get rewards by storing the salt itself in their bodies as the engram of the memory used to guide future decisions. More advanced creatures possess richer networks that allow complex forms of learning in which memories and goal states are implemented by settings (configurations) of internal mechanism several steps removed from the actual state in question (perhaps the origin of symbolic representation in more complex minds). Reactive homeostasis evolves into predictive allostasis, under the pressure to predict signals from environment and other elements of the biosphere. Importantly, memory can serve as the beginning of modularity because learning essentially groups diverse stimuli into compressed representations: complex states of affairs become remembered as compact biophysical engrams – this is the essence of the kind of modularity when a simple biophysical event kicks off the formation of a complex morphogenetic cascade such as building a “hand” in embryogenesis. In associative learning, some complex state gets functionally “hooked” to a trigger stimulus; this stimulus may be much simpler (in terms of information content) than the state it represents or the activity that it will kick-start. In somatic control networks, this is implemented as developmental modules – complex downstream morphogenetic activities that are initiated by a single driver. It has often been noted that modularity confers benefits for evolvability, but it is not always appreciated that like many other key aspects described above, it has an origin continuous with (and is driven by) control and proto-cognitive capabilities of the simplest living agents. The recent discovery that very simple bioelectric states can trigger complex organ formation, such as induction of complete eyes in various parts of the animal, are consistent with a primary role of bioelectric signaling in both learning and morphogenetic control mechanisms.

The sensory machinery, implementing inputs to the cognitive agent, is extremely ancient. Complex animals’ sense of touch, taste, temperature, hearing, etc. are mediated by the exact same ion channel mechanisms that were already discovered by bacteria and used to make sense of their world. A rich sensory input layer, consisting of receptors and channels on a cell’s membrane enables the dynamics of Active Inference to operate, and is itself highly regulated by cellular transcription and translational machinery in accordance with the main tenet of Perceptual Control Theory: behavior is the control of perception. Systems minimize surprise and optimize variational free energy by tuning their internal states in a way that optimally predicts future stimuli. This is as true for nervous systems as it is for individual cells during metazoan development. This kind of predictive coding is data compression – a mechanism that works to represent a long history of environmental inputs into a compact representation via tuning of internal states. This basic learning and inference capability is the primal origin of “understanding” and intelligence in advanced brains, which can be defined as the process of inferring patterns from raw data and making “maps” of regularities in observations that occupies every Self from the simplest of organisms to the scientist working on extracting deep theory from data.

The advent of multicellularity has been proposed to result from the drive to minimize surprise: a cell need only to surround itself with its progeny, in order to ensure a much more predictable milieu (the least surprising object in the world is a copy of yourself). If these “front line infantry” are kept in place and suppressed from proliferating (and differentiated), one immediately gets the kind of arrangement seen across biology, from stem cell/soma systems to queen/worker dynamics in insect colonies. The surrounding body becomes an informational shield (Markov blanket) for the stem cell; adding epithelial and mesenchymal cell layers enables a kind of neural-like network in which each layer provides an increased level of abstraction from environmental stimuli, enabling deep tissues to perceive not simply raw signals but highly processed, dimensionally-reduced, compressed data that form a kind of primitive “knowledge” about the outside world’s patterns. This transition from single cell state to multicellular tissue is a crucial step in the expansion of the cognitive boundary and the creation of more complex agents with larger goals (Figures 3, 4). By receiving information from neighbors, a cell in the center of a tissue can get (filtered) data about events occurring at a considerable distance. Because of the finite spread of signals through tissue and the predictive capacities of networks, this expands the cognitive horizon of a cell in both space and time. Crucially, by organizing into a (partial) electrochemical and informational pool or syncytium, all of the cells are able to measure and detect events occurring within the same boundary, creating a larger individual that emerges from the collective. The new Individual is an integrated whole because its subunits are no longer exclusively have their own local, distinct microenvironments (and thus internal models of the world) but are constrained to share a bigger, common reality due to the spread of information and influence among them. Such collective individuals can have a higher problem-solving capacity than their members, because they can support a layered architecture with experience-dependent communication channels (synapses, broadly defined), emergence of “virtual governors” with beneficial properties with respect to control capacity, and more complex state space with more attractors and thus can compute meta-system