"Bioelectricity in Development, Regeneration, and Cancers" Cell Bio 2023:
A Joint Meeting of the American Society of Cell Biology
and European Molecular Biology Organization
December 2–6, 2023, in Boston, MA, USA
Vaibhav P. Pai, PhD,¹ GuangJun Zhang, PhD,² and Michael Levin, PhD¹

Abstract
Cell Bio conferences—organized jointly by the American Society of Cell Biology (ASCB) and European Molecular Biology Organization (EMBO)—showcase a diverse global community of the brightest researchers in Cell Biology and in emerging interdisciplinary topics, including bioelectricity. In this report, we briefly overview the Cell Bio 2023 subgroup meeting “Bioelectricity in Development, Regeneration, and Cancers." This subgroup meeting featured 12 talks (7 Principal Investigators and 5 junior scientists) exploring the role of bioelectricity in endogenous and diseased states in model systems ranging from cells in culture to single-cell organisms such as yeast all the way to mammalian systems (including tools and technology developed for exploring bioelectricity and electrotaxis in cells and tissues). The subgroup meeting concluded with a discussion on the current challenges and opportunities for the field of bioelectricity.


[PAGE 1] Morphological Patterning
THE SUBGROUP MEETING was kicked off by a very interesting talk by Laura Borodinsky from the University of California-Davis on neural cell primary cilia and Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) signal in neural tube using Xenopus laevis embryonic development as a model system. Her laboratory identified calcium (Ca2+) spikes in the neural tube distributed in a dorsoventral asymmetric manner, and these Ca²+ signals operate independently in the cytosol versus primary cilia. Evidence was shown for noncanonical Shh signal acting through the TRPC3 channel regulating Ca2+ in the primary cilia, which then acts on SOX2 and other neuronal markers to cause neural stem cells to differentiate into neurons. This study is an excellent example of the integration of bioelectric signals with morphogen signals and gene-regulatory networks during embryonic development, which is a research area that remains largely unexplored and primed for experimental investigation to generate models of how these networks of signals orchestrate morphogenetic processes during embryonic development. Along similar lines, Emily Bates from the University of Colorado talked about depolarization regulating Ca2+-dependent bone morphogen protein (BMP) release in the developing palate of the mouse. She showed that Anderson–Tawil syndrome, which although mainly causes neurological defects, also leads to a lot of craniofacial morphology defects. Mouse KCNJ2 channel knockout in neural crest cells led to similar craniofacial defects. Evidence was shown that BMP signal was disrupted in these loss-of-function animals, although all BMP signal components were expressed and present. KCNJ2-mediated membrane voltage (Vmem) depolarization leads to Ca2+ transients, which are critical for BMP release from vesicles, and in KCNJ2 knockout mice, there was no depolarization, no Ca2+ transients, and no BMP release, which might be the cause of craniofacial morphology defects. Mikaela Follmer from Emily Bates' laboratory at the University of Colorado discussed unraveling the interplay between Ca2+ signal and soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment proteins receptors (SNARE) proteins in morphogenesis. She used Drosophila wing development as a model for limb development and the roles of BMP/Dpp in limb/wing patterning. She showed evidence for the importance of Ca²+ oscillations controlled by Stim and SERCA along with SNARE complex proteins for proper release of BMP/Dpp from wing discs, showing their importance for proper wing patterning. The SNARE complex proteins can act in opposing manners, allowing tight BMP/Dpp release regulation. These sets of talks suggest that Vmem and Ca2+-mediated regulation of morphogen release could be a conserved mechanism across various tissues that might work in tandem with various morphogens in regulating multiple aspects of embryonic development and patterning. GuangJun Zhang from Purdue University talked about bioelectric regulation in zebrafish embryos and fin patterning. Using a genetically encoded voltage reporter accelerated sensor of action potentials 1 (ASAP1) line, he showed direct evidence for Vmem dynamics during the cleavage furrow, and this Vmem dynamics then exhibits as cellular transients during gastrulation and can become tissue/organ level events during segmentation stages. In addition, he showed zebrafish mutants with all elongated fins were caused by transient and ectopic expression of kcnj13/Kir7.1 and kcnj10a within 1-2 days postfertilization. Ectopic expression of another five different K+ channels could induce different morphological aspects of the fins, suggesting that bioelectricity, not a specific channel, is the key for zebrafish fin size and pattern determination.

[PAGE 2] Regeneration and Cellular Reprogramming
Samatha Hack from Wendy Beane's laboratory at Western Michigan University talked about the relationship between bioelectric signals and reactive oxygen species (ROS) during adult tissue repair using the Planaria regeneration model system. ROS is crucial for wound closure and regeneration. She beautifully showed that injury-mediated Vmem depolarization may be responsible for triggering Ca2+ signal, which in turn is crucial for generating ROS, which triggers wound repair gene transcription. These findings also serve as an example of a possible relationship between bioelectricity and metabolism, as ROS are key components of cellular metabolism.


[PAGE 2] Cell Migration (Electrotaxis/Galvanotaxis) and Cancers
Daniel Cohen from Princeton University gave a fascinating presentation on the bioelectric reprogramming of collective cell behaviors. He talked about tissues as living communities and his groups successful attempts at developing tools for interactive control of tissues, which has broad applicability, for example, in expediting wound healing. Using these tools (SCHEEPDOG), he showed express control of skin cell movement (both immature and mature) using electric fields. 

[PAGE 3] Calcium Signaling and Bioelectricity
A major thread running through many of the talks was the involvement of Ca2+ signaling. Ca2+ was shown to be involved in a plethora of biological processes, from cell division, neural cell differentiation, cell migration, to morphogen secretion.

[PAGE 3] End of Session Discussion
At the end of the session's discussion, it was acknowledged unanimously that the bioelectricity field has come a long way from its beginning, and topics important for the advancement and dissemination of the field of bioelectricity were discussed.

[PAGE 4] Conclusion
Altogether, this meeting clearly revealed the excitement, opportunity, and energy around the field of bioelectricity. Owing to the time limitation, some of the prospects of bioelectricity, such as biosensors and voltage manipulating tools, such as chemogenetics and optogenetics, were not included this time. We hope future bioelectricity meetings will have these topics.